thumb|World map with imperialist countries in blue
Imperialism is the most recent evolution of the capitalist mode of production that began in the late 1800s to early 1900s, in which monopolies and cartels become the dominant economic force of society. It involves the merger of banking capital with industrial capital to create the greater finance capital and a fundamental distinguishing character of export of capital instead of export of commodities.

It is a global system of economic, political, and military domination, with the imperialist powers using a variety of means, including economic sanctions, military interventions, and cultural influence to maintain their dominance over other nations.

Lenin synthesized a Marxist analysis of imperialism in his pamphlet Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism in 1916, expanding on the foundation of the earlier work of John A. Hobson entitled Imperialism: A Study. Lenin wrote that rapid growth of industry and concentration of production in growing enterprises represent the key characteristic of capitalism.

Multiple theorists have updated, deepened, developed or critically engaged with the classical analysis of Imperialism. For example, Kwame Nkrumah,  who wrote Neocolonialism, the Last Stage of Imperialism. Most recently, the concept of neoimperialism has emerged in the work of Cheng Enfu.

The development of imperialism in the global economy also reinforces a dialectical relationship between core-periphery countries, mainly dependency and subordination of underdeveloped countries to imperialist economies. In conjunction with these developments, new theoretical models were proposed to understand developments, such as dependency theory and world-systems theory.

Imperialism is inevitable under Capitalism because Capitalism is based on the premise of infinite growth in a finite system. When capitalists first run into the limits of their own country, they will eventually be forced to expand their markets, resources, and influence into other countries and territories in order to continue increasing their profits. Not only that, but the tendency of the rate of profit to fall ensures that with their own market's profit yields are bound to decrease and in order to offset that, outwards expansionism and conquest of foreign markets becomes a material necessity rather than whim.

Furthermore, the capitalists can exploit and oppress the workers of other nations much more easily than they can in their own. For example, by moving manufacturing jobs from the imperialist countries to the imperialized countries where wages are lower, and environmental protections and labour rights are much weaker -- if they exist at all -- they can reduce costs which increases profits.

When the capitalists run into limits again, and are unable to continue increasing their profits -- even by exploiting the periphery -- they will inevitably turn Imperialism inwards and further oppress and exploit workers domestically. This is the origin of Fascism.

Mistranslation of "highest stage"
In his book on Imperialism, Lenin is often translated as having said that imperialism is "the highest stage" of capitalism. In the original Russian version, Lenin is stating that imperialism is the 'latest' or 'most recent' or contemporary stage, rather than definitively saying that it is the final stage.

Theoretical overview
In Vladimir Lenin's further analysis of imperialism, this economic stage is defined by five basic features:
* The presence of monopolies which play a decisive role in economic life.
* The merging of bank capital with industrial capital into finance capital controlled by a financial oligarchy.
* The export of capital as distinguished from the simple export of commodities.
* The formation of international monopolist capitalist associations (cartels) and multinational corporations.
* The domination and exploitation of other countries by militaristic imperialist powers, now through neocolonialism.
* The territorial division of the whole world among the biggest capitalist powers. This expansion to Marx's analysis of capitalist development was one of Lenin's most important theoretical contributions to political economy.
Marx posited that as capitalist economies matured, they would inevitably be driven into a crisis which would result in internal class revolt and the establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat (and eventually socialism). However, according to Lenin's observations, the development of imperialism allowed capitalism to postpone this crisis through the acquisition of colonies, which served as a new outlets for capital investment and a new source of labour power to exploit.

This scramble for the expansion of capitalist empires drove the various imperialist powers into a competition with one another over the size of their imperialist spheres of influence and access to resources and labour markets, which led to destructive inter-imperialist conflicts such as the First World War. Imperialism thus stretches the inherent contradictions of capitalism to ever more extreme limits, leading J.V. Stalin to deem Leninism the "Marxism of the era of imperialism".

Imperialism as a stage of development in capitalism means that it will always develop in any sufficiently advanced capitalist mode of production. As markets become saturated within the boundaries of the individual nation (due to an influx of producers), capital must be exported elsewhere, and the main function of banks is to help with that (see finance capitalism).

Capitalist countries must eventually turn to imperialism for two main reasons:
#Capitalism requires constant consumption, which translates into constant growth (and GDP growth). Without GDP growth, capitalism stagnates and a recession occurs. However, since it is impossible to expect infinite growth with finite available resources and as markets become saturated, the bourgeoisie must seek new opportunities.
#The bourgeoisie is also in constant internal competition, and as such there is a very rational reason for a capitalist to emerge victorious over the competition; accessing untapped markets and cheaper labour will give them an edge over the competition.
However, imperialized countries will not be allowed to develop past the most primitive stage of capitalism, preventing them from developing their own imperialism. In these countries, we may see the emergence of two distinct subsections of the bourgeoisie. Firstly, a "comprador" class, i.e. the section of the national bourgeoisie which is allied with, and dependent upon, foreign imperialist investment; and second, the "national" bourgeoisie, whose class interests are, at least temporarily, aligned with the exploited working class: to achieve national liberation (so that they can become exploiters without being exploited, upon which point their tentative alignment with the national proletariat will end).

Origins and historical development
thumb|Most modern imperialist countries originated as [[Genocide|genocidal colonial powers]]
The development of imperialism began with the Panic of 1873, which caused an economic depression lasting through the 1880s. When the economy recovered in 1889, cartels took advantage of the situation and drove up prices. After another depression from 1900 to 1903, they became even stronger and controlled the coal, mining, and iron industries by 1905. Not all are combat-ready troops. The numbers of these U.S. personnel in some particular countries is as follows:

* Germany: 36,000
* Italy: 12,000
* Britain: 9,000
* Spain: 3,000
* Turkey: 1,600

Besides these personnel, the U.S. rotates 4,500 troops through Poland.

Myths
Soviet "imperialism"
During the Cold War, a rivalry between the world's two global powers at the time (the USA and the Soviet Union), the CIA's Congress for Cultural Freedom cultivated a milieu of anti-Soviet leftists to advance the geopolitical line of the US. One accusation that was leveled against the Soviet Union was that it was yet another imperialist state, based on the conflicts which happened between the Soviet Union and China. USSR did not practice imperialism in the Leninist sense — it did not export capital and was not under control of a financial oligarchy.

Chinese "imperialism"
In modern times, some accuse China of being imperialist, mainly in Africa. These people again use the liberal definition of imperialism and can be ignored in much the same way.

With its Belt and Road Initiative, China does not practice the same harsh policies as the IMF (namely, forcing austerity upon loan recipients) and that is why they are being favored by more and more countries, leading to a disinformation campaign by the imperial core to help drive popular support from the B&R and back towards the IMF. Famously, Chinese loans pay for infrastructure (needed for development), are often forgiven and restructured, and there are no policies required to get such a loan. Where the West builds economic dependency the PRC builds mutual economic cooperation.<blockquote>If any debtors encounter difficulties to pay on time, there may be tailored plans including rescheduling… adding grants to help bring projects back to life, conducting debt-equity swaps, or hiring Chinese firms to assist operations. Just like repairing and enhancing a patient’s hemopoietic system, adopting such measures to help the projects get back on track and gain profit has advantages over simply offering write-offs which may only solve issues on the surface and are unsustainable</blockquote>Moreover, unlike the IMF and Western international financial institutions the PRC does not enforce austerity upon nations with heavy debt to it. Instead only conditioning it on political recognition of the Chinese state rather than the forward base of Western Imperialism in East Asia, Taiwan.<blockquote>...China has not applied the kinds of highly contested economic austerity and structural adjustment conditions imposed by the HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries)  process. Yet, there is always one political condition: countries need to have diplomatic relations with Beijing (instead of Taipei).

Early theoreticians (pre-1945)
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
Friedrich Engels alluded to imperialism in The principles of communism:

At the time of his writing, imperialism was not yet a word in common use (not until the 1870s) however, policies of imperialism were already happening around the world—especially at hands of the British Empire in Africa.

Given that imperialism is, (according to Lenin) the highest stage of capitalism, one tendency of imperialism is to export the class conflict of a nation to foreign lands. Thus, the British nation, in order to solve its problem of unemployment and food scarcity along a capitalist basis (without socialism; redistribution of wealth and power to the commoners through social ownership), had to find new lands to settle the unemployed.

Later theoreticians (post-1945)
Michael Parenti
Michael Parenti described several examples of imperialism in Against Empire.

Further reading
*  Imperialism, the highest stage of capitalism
* Neocolonialism, the last stage of imperialism
* Five Characteristics of Neoimperialism

Notes
<references group="note"/>
References