The present English translation of Vladimir Lenin's “Left-wing” communism,
an infantile disorder
is a reprint of the text given in V. I. Lenin, Selected Works, English edition, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1952, Vol. II, Part 2.

The notes at the end of the book
are based on those given in the English edition
and in the Chinese edition published by the People's Publishing House, Peking, in September 1964.

In what sense we can speak of the international significance of the Russian Revolution
In the first months
after the proletariat in Russia
had won political power (October 25 [November 7], 1917),
it might have seemed
that the enormous difference
between backward Russia
and the advanced countries of Western Europe
would lead to the proletarian revolution
in the latter countries
bearing very little resemblance to ours.
We now possess quite considerable international experience,
which shows very definitely that certain fundamental features of our revolution
have a significance
that is not local,
or peculiarly national, or Russian alone, but international.
I am not speaking here of international significance
in the broad sense of the term:
not merely several but all the primary features of our revolution,
and many of its secondary features,
are of international significance
in the meaning of its effect:
on all countries.
I am speaking of it
in the narrowest sense of the word,
taking international significance
to mean the international validity
or the historical inevitability
of a repetition,
on an international scale,
of what has taken place in our country.
It must be admitted
that certain fundamental features of our revolution
do possess that significance.

It would, of course,
be grossly erroneous
to exaggerate this truth
and to extend it beyond certain fundamental features of our revolution.
It would also be erroneous
to lose sight of the fact that,
soon after the victory of the proletarian revolution
in at least one of the advanced countries,
a sharp change will probably come about:
Russia will cease to be the model
and will once again become a backward country
(in the “Soviet” and the socialist sense).

At the present moment in history,
however,
it is the Russian model
that reveals to all countries something—
and something highly significant—
of their near and inevitable future.
Advanced workers in all lands
have long realized this;
more often than not,
they have grasped it
with their revolutionary class instinct
rather than realized it.
Herein lies the international “significance”
(in the narrow sense of the word)
of Soviet power,
and of the fundamentals of Bolshevik theory and tactics.
The “revolutionary” leaders of the Second International,
such as Kautsky in Germany
and Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler in Austria,
have failed to understand this,
which is why they have proved to be reactionaries
and advocates
of the worst kind
of opportunism
and social treachery.
Incidentally,
the anonymous pamphlet
entitled The world revolution (Weltrevolution),
which appeared in Vienna in 1919
(Sozialistische Bücherei, Heft 11; Ignaz Brand),
very clearly
reveals their entire thinking
and their entire range of ideas,
or, rather, the full extent of their stupidity,
pedantry,
baseness and betrayal
of working-class interests—
and that, moreover,
under the guise of “defending”
the idea of “world revolution”.

We shall, however,
deal with this pamphlet
in greater detail
some other time.
We shall here note only one more point:
in bygone days,
when he was still a Marxist
and not a renegade, Kautsky,
dealing with the question as an historian,
foresaw the possibility of a situation
arising in which the revolutionary spirit of the Russian proletariat
would provide a model to Western Europe.
This was in 1902,
when Kautsky wrote an article for the revolutionary Iskra,
entitled “The Slavs and Revolution”.
Here is what he wrote in the article:
<blockquote>“
At the present time [in contrast with 1848]
it would seem that not only have the Slavs entered the ranks of the revolutionary nations,
but that the centre of revolutionary thought and revolutionary action
is shifting more and more to the Slavs.
The revolutionary centre is shifting from the West to the East.
In the first half of the nineteenth century
it was located in France,
at times in England.
In 1848 Germany too joined the ranks of the revolutionary nations...
The new century has begun with events
which suggest the idea that we are approaching
a further shift of the revolutionary centre,
namely, to Russia...
Russia,
which has borrowed so much revolutionary initiative from the West,
is now perhaps herself ready to serve the West
as a source of revolutionary energy.
The Russian revolutionary movement
that is now flaring up
will perhaps prove to be the most potent means of exorcising the spirit of flabby philistinism
and coldly calculating politics
that is beginning to spread in our midst,
and it may cause the fighting spirit
and the passionate devotion to our great ideals
to flare up again.
To Western Europe,
Russia has long ceased to be a bulwark of reaction and absolutism.
I think the reverse is true today.
Western Europe is becoming Russia’s bulwark of reaction and absolutism...
The Russian revolutionaries might perhaps have coped with the tsar
long ago
had they not been compelled
at the same time
to fight his ally—European capital.
Let us hope that this time they will succeed
in coping with both enemies,
and that the new ‘Holy Alliance’
will collapse more rapidly
than its predecessors did.
However the present struggle in Russia
may end,
the blood and suffering of the martyrs
whom, unfortunately, it will produce in too great numbers,
will not have been in vain.
They will nourish the shoots of social revolution
throughout the civilized world
and make them grow more luxuriantly and rapidly.
In 1848
the Slavs were a killing frost
which blighted the flowers of the people’s spring.
Perhaps they are now destined to be the storm
that will break the ice of reaction
and irresistibly bring with it a new and happy spring for the nations
”</blockquote>
How well Karl Kautsky wrote eighteen years ago!

An essential condition of the Bolsheviks’ success
It is,
I think, almost universally realized at present
that the Bolsheviks could not have retained power
for two and a half months,
let alone two and a half years,
without the most rigorous and truly iron discipline in our Party,
or without the fullest and unreserved support
from the entire mass of the working class,
that is, from all thinking, honest, devoted and influential elements in it,
capable of leading the backward strata
or carrying the latter along with them.

The dictatorship of the proletariat
means a most determined and most ruthless war
waged by the new class
against a more powerful enemy,
the bourgeoisie,
whose resistance is increased tenfold
by their overthrow
(even if only in a single country),
and whose power lies,
not only in the strength of international capital,
the strength and durability
of their international connections,
but also in the force of habit,
in the strength of small-scale production.
Unfortunately,
small-scale production is still widespread in the world,
and small-scale production
engenders capitalism
and the bourgeoisie continuously,
daily, hourly, spontaneously, and on a mass scale.
All these reasons
make the dictatorship of the proletariat necessary,
and victory over the bourgeoisie
is impossible
without a long, stubborn and desperate life-and-death struggle
which calls for tenacity, discipline, and a single and inflexible will.

I repeat:
the experience of the victorious dictatorship of the proletariat in Russia
has clearly shown even to those who are incapable of thinking
or have had no occasion to give thought to the matter
that absolute centralization
and rigorous discipline of the proletariat
are an essential condition of victory over the bourgeoisie.

This is often dwelt on.
However,
not nearly enough thought is given to what it means,
and under what conditions it is possible.
Would it not be better if the salutations addressed to the Soviets
and the Bolsheviks
were more frequently accompanied by a profound analysis
of the reasons why the Bolsheviks have been able to build up the discipline
needed by the revolutionary proletariat?

As a current of political thought
and as a political party,
Bolshevism has existed since 1903.
Only the history of Bolshevism
during the entire period of its existence
can satisfactorily explain why it has been able to build up and maintain,
under most difficult conditions,
the iron discipline
needed for the victory of the proletariat.

The first questions to arise are:
how is the discipline of the proletariat’s revolutionary party maintained?
How is it tested?
How is it reinforced?
First,
by the class-consciousness of the proletarian vanguard
and by its devotion to the revolution,
by its tenacity,
self-sacrifice and heroism.
Second, by its ability to link up,
maintain the closest contact,
and—if you wish—
merge, in certain measure,
with the broadest masses
of the working people—
primarily with the proletariat,
but also with the non-proletarian masses of working people.
Third,
by the correctness of the political leadership
exercised by this vanguard,
by the correctness of its political strategy and tactics,
provided the broad masses
have seen,
from their own experience,
that they are correct.
Without these conditions,
discipline in a revolutionary party
really capable of being the party of the advanced class,
whose mission it is to overthrow the bourgeoisie
and transform the whole of society,
cannot be achieved.
Without these conditions,
all attempts to establish discipline
inevitably fall flat
and end up in phrasemongering and clowning.
On the other hand,
these conditions cannot emerge at once.
They are created only by prolonged effort
and hard-won experience.
Their creation is facilitated by a correct revolutionary theory,
which, in its turn,
is not a dogma,
but assumes final shape
only in close connection
with the practical activity
of a truly mass and truly revolutionary movement.

The fact that, in 1917–20,
Bolshevism was able,
under unprecedentedly difficult conditions,
to build up and successfully maintain the strictest centralization and iron discipline
was due simply to a number of historical peculiarities of Russia.

On the one hand,
Bolshevism arose in 1903
on a very firm foundation of Marxist theory.
The correctness of this revolutionary theory,
and of it alone,
has been proved,
not only by world experience throughout the nineteenth century,
but especially by the experience of the seekings and vacillations,
the errors and disappointments of revolutionary thought in Russia.
For about half a century—
approximately from the forties to the nineties of the last century—
progressive thought in Russia,
oppressed by a most brutal and reactionary tsarism,
sought eagerly for a correct revolutionary theory,
and followed with the utmost diligence and thoroughness
each and every “last word”
in this sphere
in Europe and America.
Russia achieved Marxism—
the only correct revolutionary theory—
through the agony she experienced
in the course of half a century
of unparalleled torment and sacrifice,
of unparalleled revolutionary heroism,
incredible energy,
devoted searching, study, practical trial, disappointment, verification, and comparison with European experience.
Thanks to the political emigration
caused by tsarism,
revolutionary Russia,
in the second half of the nineteenth century,
acquired a wealth of international links
and excellent information
on the forms and theories of the world revolutionary movement,
such as no other country possessed.

On the other hand,
Bolshevism,
which had arisen on this granite foundation of theory,
went through fifteen years of practical history (1903–17)
unequalled anywhere in the world
in its wealth of experience.
During those fifteen years,
no other country knew anything even approximating to that revolutionary experience,
that rapid and varied succession
of different forms of the movement
—
legal and illegal,
peaceful and stormy,
underground and open,
local circles and mass movements,
and parliamentary and terrorist forms.
In no other country has there been concentrated,
in so brief a period,
such a wealth of forms, shades,
and methods of struggle
of all classes of modern society,
a struggle which, owing to the backwardness of the country
and the severity of the tsarist yoke,
matured with exceptional rapidity,
and assimilated most eagerly
and successfully
the appropriate “last word”
of American and European political experience.

The principal stages
in the history of Bolshevism
The approach of a great storm
was sensed everywhere.
All classes were in a state of ferment and preparation.
Abroad,
the press of the political exiles
discussed the theoretical aspects
of all the fundamental problems of the revolution.
Representatives of the three main classes,
of the three principal political trends—
the liberal-bourgeois,
the petty-bourgeois-democratic
(concealed behind “social-democratic” and “social-revolutionary” labels),
and the proletarian-revolutionary—
anticipated and prepared the impending open class struggle
by waging a most bitter struggle
on issues of programme and tactics.
All the issues on which the masses
waged an armed struggle
in 1905–07 and 1917–20
can (and should) be studied,
in their embryonic form,
in the press of the period.
Among these three main trends
there were, of course,
a host of intermediate, transitional or half-hearted forms.
It would be more correct
to say that those political and ideological trends
which were genuinely of a class nature
crystallised in the struggle of press organs, parties, factions and groups;
the classes were forging the requisite political and ideological weapons
for the impending battles.

The years of revolution (1905–07).
All classes came out into the open.
All programmatical and tactical views
were tested by the action of the masses.
In its extent and acuteness,
the strike struggle had no parallel anywhere in the world.
The economic strike
developed into a political strike,
and the latter into insurrection.
The relations between the proletariat,
as the leader,
and the vacillating and unstable peasantry,
as the led,
were tested in practice.
The Soviet form of organization
came into being in the spontaneous development of the struggle.
The controversies of that period
over the significance of the Soviets
anticipated the great struggle of 1917–20.
The alternation of parliamentary and non-parliamentary forms of struggle,
of the tactics of boycotting parliament
and that of participating in parliament,
of legal and illegal forms of struggle,
and likewise their interrelations and connections—
all this was marked by an extraordinary wealth of content.
As for teaching the fundamentals of political science
to masses and leaders,
to classes and parties alike,
each month of this period
was equivalent to an entire year
of “peaceful” and “constitutional” development.
Without the “dress rehearsal” of 1905,
the victory of the October Revolution in 1917
would have been impossible.

The years of reaction (1907–10).
Tsarism was victorious.
All the revolutionary and opposition parties were smashed.
Depression, demoralisation, splits, discord, defection, and pornography
took the place of politics.
There was an ever greater drift
towards philosophical idealism;
mysticism became the garb
of counter-revolutionary sentiments.
At the same time, however,
it was this great defeat
that taught the revolutionary parties
and the revolutionary class
a real and very useful lesson,
a lesson in historical dialectics,
a lesson in an understanding of the political struggle,
and in the art and science of waging that struggle.
It is at moments of need that one learns who one’s friends are.
Defeated armies learn their lesson.

Victorious tsarism
was compelled to speed up the destruction
of the remnants of the pre-bourgeois,
patriarchal mode of life in Russia.
The country’s development along bourgeois lines
proceeded apace.
Illusions that stood outside and above class distinctions,
illusions concerning the possibility of avoiding capitalism,
were scattered to the winds.
The class struggle
manifested itself
in a quite new and more distinct way.

The revolutionary parties
had to complete their education.
They were learning how to attack.
Now they had to realize
that such knowledge
must be supplemented
with the knowledge of how to retreat in good order.
They had to realize—
and it is from bitter experience
that the revolutionary class
learns to realize this—
that victory is impossible
unless one has learned how to attack and retreat properly.
Of all the defeated opposition and revolutionary parties,
the Bolsheviks effected the most orderly retreat,
with the least loss to their “army”,
with its core best preserved,
with the least significant splits
(in point of depth and incurability),
with the least demoralisation,
and in the best condition
to resume work on the broadest scale
and in the most correct and energetic manner.
The Bolsheviks achieved this only
because they ruthlessly exposed
and expelled the revolutionary phrase-mongers,
those who did not wish to understand that one had to retreat,
that one had to know how to retreat,
and that one had absolutely to learn how to work legally
in the most reactionary of parliaments,
in the most reactionary of trade unions,
co-operative and insurance societies
and similar organizations.

The years of revival (1910–14).
At first progress was incredibly slow,
then, following the Lena events of 1912,
it became somewhat more rapid.
Overcoming unprecedented difficulties,
the Bolsheviks thrust back the Mensheviks,
whose role as bourgeois agents in the working-class movement
was clearly realized
by the entire bourgeoisie after 1905,
and whom the bourgeoisie
therefore supported in a thousand ways against the Bolsheviks.
But the Bolsheviks would never have succeeded in doing this
had they not followed the correct tactics
of combining illegal work
with the utilisation
of “legal opportunities”,
which they made a point of doing.
In the elections to the arch-reactionary Duma,
the Bolsheviks won the full support of the worker curia.

The First Imperialist World War (1914–17).
Legal parliamentarianism,
with an extremely reactionary “parliament”,
rendered most useful service to the Bolsheviks,
the party of the revolutionary proletariat.
The Bolshevik deputies were exiled to Siberia.
All shades of social-imperialism social-chauvinism,
social-patriotism,
inconsistent and consistent internationalism,
pacifism,
and the revolutionary repudiation
of pacifist illusions
found full expression in the Russian émigré press.
The learned fools and the old women of the Second International,
who had arrogantly and contemptuously
turned up their noses
at the abundance of “factions”
in the Russian socialist movement
and at the bitter struggle
they were waging among themselves,
were unable—
when the war deprived them
of their vaunted “legality”
in all the advanced countries—
to organize anything even approximating such a free (illegal) interchange of views
and such a free (illegal) evolution of correct views
as the Russian revolutionaries did in Switzerland
and in a number of other countries.
That was why
both the avowed social-patriots
and the “Kautskyites”
of all countries
proved to be the worst traitors
to the proletariat.
One of the principal reasons why Bolshevism was able to achieve victory in 1917–20
was that,
since the end of 1914,
it has been ruthlessly
exposing the baseness and vileness
of social-chauvinism
and “Kautskyism”
(to which Longuetism in France,
the views of the Fabians
and the leaders of the Independent Labour Party in Britain,
of Turati in Italy, etc., correspond),
the masses
later becoming more and more convinced,
from their own experience,
of the correctness of the Bolshevik views.

The second revolution in Russia (February to October 1917).
Tsarism’s senility and obsoleteness
had (with the aid of the blows and hardships
of a most agonising war)
created an incredibly destructive force
directed against it.
Within a few days Russia was transformed
into a democratic bourgeois republic,
freer—in war conditions—
than any other country in the world.
The leaders of the opposition and revolutionary parties
began to set up a government,
just as is done in the most “strictly parliamentary” republics
;
the fact that a man had been a leader of an opposition party in parliament—
even in a most reactionary parliament—
facilitated his subsequent role in the revolution.

In a few weeks
the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
thoroughly assimilated all the methods and manners,
the arguments and sophistries
of the European heroes
of the Second International,
of the ministerialists and other opportunist riff-raff.
Everything we now read about the Scheidemanns and Noskes,
about Kautsky and Hilferding,
Renner and Austerlitz,
Otto Bauer and Fritz Adler,
Turati and Longuet,
about the Fabians and the leaders of the Independent Labour Party of Britain
—
all this seems to us
(and indeed is)
a dreary repetition,
a reiteration,
of an old and familiar refrain.
We have already witnessed all this
in the instance of the Mensheviks.
As history would have it,
the opportunists of a backward country
became the forerunners
of the opportunists
in a number of advanced countries.

If the heroes of the Second International
have all gone bankrupt
and have disgraced themselves
over the question of the significance and role of the Soviets and Soviet rule;
if the leaders of the three very important parties
which have now left the Second International
(namely, the German Independent Social-Democratic Party,
the French Longuetists and the British Independent Labour Party)
have disgraced themselves
and become entangled in this question
in a most “telling” fashion;
if they have all shown themselves
slaves
to the prejudices
of petty-bourgeois democracy
(fully in the spirit of the petty-bourgeois of 1848
who called themselves “Social-Democrats”)
—
then
we can only say that we have already witnessed all this
in the instance of the Mensheviks.
As history would have it,
the Soviets came into being in Russia in 1905;
from February to October 1917
they were turned to a false use
by the Mensheviks,
who went bankrupt
because of their inability to understand the role and significance of the Soviets;
today the idea of Soviet power
has emerged throughout the world
and is spreading among the proletariat of all countries
with extraordinary speed.
Like our Mensheviks,
the old heroes of the Second International
are everywhere going bankrupt,
because they are incapable of understanding the role and significance of the Soviets.
Experience has proved that,
on certain very important questions
of the proletarian revolution,
all countries will inevitably have to do what Russia has done.

Despite views
that are today often to be met with in Europe and America,
the Bolsheviks began their victorious struggle
against the parliamentary and (in fact) bourgeois republic
and against the Mensheviks
in a very cautious manner,
and the preparations they made for it
were by no means simple.
At the beginning of the period mentioned,
we did not call for the overthrow of the government
but explained that it was impossible to overthrow it
without first changing the composition and the temper of the Soviets.
We did not proclaim a boycott of the bourgeois parliament,
the Constituent Assembly,
but said—
and following the April (1917) Conference of our Party
began to state officially in the name of the Party—
that a bourgeois republic with a Constituent Assembly
would be better than a bourgeois republic
without a Constituent Assembly,
but that a “workers’ and peasants’ ” republic, a Soviet republic,
would be better than any bourgeois-democratic, parliamentary republic.
Without such thorough,
circumspect and long preparations,
we could not have achieved victory in October 1917,
or have consolidated that victory.

The struggle against which enemies within the working-class movement
helped Bolshevism develop, gain strength,
and become steeled First and foremost,
the struggle against opportunism
which in 1914 definitely developed into social-chauvinism
and definitely sided with the bourgeoisie,
against the proletariat.
Naturally,
this was Bolshevism’s principal enemy
within the working-class movement.
It still remains the principal enemy on an international scale.
The Bolsheviks have been devoting the greatest attention to this enemy.
This aspect of Bolshevik activities
is now fairly well known abroad
too.

It was, however,
different with Bolshevism’s other enemy
within the working-class movement.
Little is known in other countries
of the fact that Bolshevism took shape,
developed and became steeled
in the long years of struggle
against petty-bourgeois revolutionism,
which smacks of anarchism,
or borrows something from the latter
and, in all essential matters,
does not measure up to the conditions and requirements
of a consistently proletarian class struggle.
Marxist theory has established—
and the experience of all European revolutions and revolutionary movements
has fully confirmed—
that the petty proprietor,
the small master
(a social type existing on a very extensive
and even mass scale in many European countries),
who, under capitalism,
always suffers oppression
and very frequently
a most acute and rapid deterioration
in his conditions of life,
and even ruin,
easily goes to revolutionary extremes,
but is incapable of perseverance, organization, discipline and steadfastness.
A petty bourgeois driven to frenzy
by the horrors of capitalism
is a social phenomenon
which, like anarchism,
is characteristic of all capitalist countries.
The instability of such revolutionism,
its barrenness,
and its tendency to turn rapidly into submission,
apathy, phantasms,
and even a frenzied infatuation with one bourgeois fad or another—
all this is common knowledge.
However,
a theoretical or abstract recognition of these truths
does not at all
rid revolutionary parties
of old errors,
which always crop up at unexpected occasions,
in somewhat new forms,
in a hitherto unfamiliar garb or surroundings,
in an unusual—
a more or less unusual—situation.

Anarchism
was not infrequently
a kind of penalty
for the opportunist sins
of the working-class movement.
The two monstrosities complemented each other.
And if in Russia—
despite the more petty-bourgeois composition of her population
as compared with the other European countries—
anarchism’s influence was negligible
during the two revolutions (of 1905 and 1917)
and the preparations for them,
this should no doubt stand partly to the credit of Bolshevism,
which has always waged a most ruthless and uncompromising struggle
against opportunism.
I say “partly”,
since of still greater importance
in weakening anarchism’s influence in Russia
was the circumstance
that in the past (the seventies of the nineteenth century)
it was able to develop inordinately
and to reveal its absolute erroneousness,
its unfitness
to serve the revolutionary class
as a guiding theory.

When it came into being in 1903,
Bolshevism took over the tradition
of a ruthless struggle
against petty-bourgeois,
semi-anarchist (or dilettante-anarchist) revolutionism,
a tradition which had always existed
in revolutionary Social-Democracy
and had become particularly strong in our country
during the years 1900–03,
when the foundations for a mass party
of the revolutionary proletariat
were being laid in Russia.
Bolshevism took over and carried on the struggle against a party
which, more than any other,
expressed the tendencies
of petty-bourgeois revolutionism,
namely, the “Socialist-Revolutionary” Party,
and waged that struggle
on three main issues.
First, that party,
which rejected Marxism,
stubbornly refused
(or, it might be more correct to say:
was unable)
to understand the need for a strictly objective appraisal
of the class forces
and their alignment,
before taking any political action.
Second,
this party considered itself particularly “revolutionary”,
or “Left”,
because of its recognition
of individual terrorism,
assassination—
something that we Marxists emphatically rejected.
It was, of course,
only on grounds of expediency
that we rejected individual terrorism,
whereas people who were capable of condemning “on principle”
the terror of the Great French Revolution,
or, in general,
the terror employed by a victorious revolutionary party
which is besieged by the bourgeoisie of the whole world,
were ridiculed
and laughed to scorn by Plekhanov in 1900–03,
when he was a Marxist and a revolutionary.
Third,
the “Socialist-Revolutionaries”
thought it very “Left”
to sneer at the comparatively insignificant opportunist sins
of the German Social-Democratic Party,
while they themselves imitated the extreme opportunists
of that party,
for example,
on the agrarian question,
or on the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

History,
incidentally,
has now confirmed on a vast and world-wide scale
the opinion we have always advocated,
namely,
that German revolutionary Social-Democracy
(note that as far back as 1900–03
Plekhanov demanded Bernstein’s expulsion from the Party,
and in 1913 the Bolsheviks,
always continuing this tradition,
exposed Legien’s baseness, vileness and treachery)
came closest to being the party
the revolutionary proletariat needs
in order to achieve victory.
Today, in 1920,
after all the ignominious failures and crises
of the war period
and the early post-war years,
it can be plainly seen that,
of all the Western parties,
the German revolutionary Social-Democrats
produced the finest leaders,
and recovered and gained new strength more rapidly
than the others did.
This may be seen in the instances
both of the Spartacists and the Left,
proletarian wing of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany,
which is waging an incessant struggle
against the opportunism
and spinelessness
of the Kautskys,
Hilferdings, Ledebours and Crispiens.
If we now cast a glance
to take in a complete historical period,
namely,
from the Paris Commune to the first Socialist Soviet Republic,
we shall find that Marxism’s attitude to anarchism in general
stands out
most definitely and unmistakably.
In the final analysis,
Marxism proved to be correct,
and although the anarchists rightly pointed to the opportunist views
on the state prevalent
among most of the socialist parties,
it must be said,
first,
that this opportunism
was connected with the distortion,
and even deliberate suppression,
of Marx’s views on the state
(in my book, The state and revolution,
I pointed out that for thirty-six years,
from 1875 to 1911,
Bebel withheld a letter by Engels,
which very clearly, vividly,
bluntly and definitively exposed the opportunism
of the current Social-Democratic views on the state);
second,
that the rectification of these opportunist views,
and the recognition of Soviet power
and its superiority
to bourgeois parliamentary democracy
proceeded most rapidly and extensively among those trends in the socialist parties of Europe and America
that were most Marxist.

The struggle
that Bolshevism
waged against “Left” deviations
within its own Party
assumed particularly large proportions
on two occasions:
in 1908,
on the question of whether or not to participate
in a most reactionary “parliament”
and in the legal workers’ societies,
which were being restricted by most reactionary laws;
and again in 1918
(the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk),
on the question of whether one “compromise” or another was permissible.

In 1908
the “Left” Bolsheviks
were expelled from our Party
for stubbornly refusing to understand the necessity of participating
in a most reactionary “parliament”.
The “Lefts”—among whom there were many splendid revolutionaries
who subsequently were (and still are) commendable members of the Communist Party—
based themselves particularly on the successful experience of the 1905 boycott.
When, in August 1905,
the tsar proclaimed the convocation of a consultative “parliament”,
the Bolsheviks called for its boycott,
in the teeth of all the opposition parties
and the Mensheviks,
and the “parliament”
was in fact swept away by the revolution of October 1905.
The boycott proved correct at the time,
not because nonparticipation in reactionary parliaments
is correct in general,
but because we accurately appraised the objective situation,
which was leading to the rapid development
of the mass strikes
first
into a political strike,
then into a revolutionary strike,
and finally into an uprising.
Moreover,
the struggle centred at that time
on the question
of whether the convocation of the first representative assembly
should be left to the tsar,
or an attempt
should be made
to wrest its convocation from the old regime.
When there was not,
and could not be,
any certainty
that the objective situation
was of a similar kind,
and when there was no certainty of a similar trend
and the same rate of development,
the boycott was no longer correct.

The Bolsheviks’ boycott of “parliament” in 1905
enriched the revolutionary proletariat
with highly valuable political experience
and showed that,
when legal and illegal parliamentary and non-parliamentary forms of struggle
are combined,
it is sometimes useful
and even essential to reject parliamentary forms.
It would, however, be highly erroneous
to apply this experience blindly,
imitatively and uncritically
to other conditions and other situations.
The Bolsheviks’ boycott of the Duma in 1906
was a mistake,
although a minor and easily remediable one.
The boycott of the Duma in 1907, 1908 and subsequent years
was a most serious error
and difficult to remedy,
because, on the one hand,
a very rapid rise of the revolutionary tide
and its conversion into an uprising
was not to be expected,
and, on the other hand,
the entire historical situation
attendant upon the renovation of the bourgeois monarchy
called for legal and illegal activities being combined.
Today, when we look back at this fully completed historical period,
whose connection with subsequent periods
has now become quite clear,
it becomes most obvious
that in 1908–14
the Bolsheviks could not have preserved
(let alone strengthened and developed)
the core of the revolutionary party of the proletariat,
had they not upheld,
in a most strenuous struggle,
the viewpoint that it was obligatory
to combine legal and illegal forms of struggle,
and that it was obligatory to participate even in a most reactionary parliament
and in a number of other institutions
hemmed in by reactionary laws
(sick benefit societies, etc.).

In 1918 things did not reach a split.
At that time
the “Left” Communists
formed only a separate group or “faction” within our Party,
and that not for long.
In the same year, 1918,
the most prominent representatives of “Left Communism”,
for example,
Comrades Radek and Bukharin,
openly acknowledged their error.
It had seemed to them
that the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
was a compromise with the imperialists,
which was inexcusable on principle and harmful to the party of the revolutionary proletariat.
It was indeed a compromise with the imperialists,
but it was a compromise
which, under the circumstances,
had to be made.

Today,
when I hear our tactics
in signing the Brest-Litovsk Treaty
being attacked by the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
for instance,
or when I hear Comrade Lansbury say,
in a conversation with me,
“
Our British trade union leaders say that if it was permissible for the Bolsheviks to compromise,
it is permissible for them to compromise too”,
I usually reply by first of all giving a simple and “popular” example:

Imagine that your car is held up by armed bandits.
You hand them over your money, passport, revolver and car.
In return you are rid of the pleasant company of the bandits.
That is unquestionably a compromise.
“Do ut des”
(I “give” you money, fire-arms and a car “so that you give” me the opportunity to get away from you with a whole skin).
It would, however, be difficult to find a sane man
who would declare such a compromise
to be “inadmissible on principle”,
or who would call the compromiser
an accomplice of the bandits
(even though the bandits might use the car and the firearms for further robberies).
Our compromise with the bandits of German imperialism
was just that kind of compromise.

But when, in 1914–18
and then in 1918–20,
the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia,
the Scheidemannites (and to a large extent the Kautskyites)
in Germany,
Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler
(to say nothing of the Renners and Co.)
in Austria,
the Renaudels and Longuets and Co.
in France,
the Fabians,
the Independents and the Labourites in Britain
entered into compromises
with the bandits of their own bourgeoisie,
and sometimes of the “Allied” bourgeoisie,
and against the revolutionary proletariat of their own countries,
all these gentlemen were actually acting as accomplices in banditry.

The conclusion is clear:
to reject compromises “on principle”,
to reject the permissibility of compromises in general,
no matter of what kind,
is childishness,
which it is difficult even to consider seriously.
A political leader
who desires to be useful
to the revolutionary proletariat
must be able to distinguish concrete cases of compromises
that are inexcusable
and are an expression of opportunism and treachery;
he must direct all the force of criticism,
the full intensity of merciless exposure
and relentless war,
against these concrete compromises,
and not allow the past masters
of “practical” socialism
and the parliamentary Jesuits to dodge and wriggle out of responsibility
by means of disquisitions
on “compromises in general”.
It is in this way
that the “leaders”
of the British trade unions,
as well as of the Fabian society
and the “Independent” Labour Party,
dodge responsibility for the treachery
they have perpetrated,
for having made a compromise
that is really tantamount
to the worst kind of opportunism,
treachery and betrayal.

There are different kinds of compromises.
One must be able to analyze the situation
and the concrete conditions
of each compromise,
or of each variety of compromise.
One must learn to distinguish between a man who has given up his money and fire-arms to bandits
so as to lessen the evil they can do and to facilitate their capture and execution,
and a man who gives his money and fire-arms to bandits
so as to share in the loot.
In politics
this is by no means always as elementary as it is in this childishly simple example.
However,
anyone who is out to think up for the workers
some kind of recipe
that will provide them
with cut-and-dried solutions
for all contingencies,
or promises that the policy of the revolutionary proletariat
will never come up against difficult or complex situations,
is simply a charlatan.

To leave no room for misinterpretation,
I shall attempt to outline,
if only very briefly,
several fundamental rules
for the analysis of concrete compromises.

The party
which entered into a compromise
with the German imperialists
by signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
had been evolving its internationalism
in practice
ever since the end of 1914.
It was not afraid
to call for the defeat of the tsarist monarchy
and to condemn “defense of country”
in a war
between two imperialist robbers.
The parliamentary representatives of this party
preferred exile in Siberia
to taking a road leading to ministerial portfolios
in a bourgeois government.
The revolution that overthrew tsarism
and established a democratic republic
put this party to a new and tremendous test—
it did not enter into any agreements
with its “own” imperialists,
but prepared and brought about their overthrow.
When it had assumed political power,
this party did not leave a vestige
of either landed or capitalist ownership.
After making public and repudiating the imperialists’ secret treaties,
this party proposed peace to all nations,
and yielded to the violence of the Brest-Litovsk robbers
only after the Anglo-French imperialists
had torpedoed the conclusion of a peace,
and after the Bolsheviks
had done everything humanly possible
to hasten the revolution in Germany and other countries.
The absolute correctness of this compromise,
entered into by such a party
in such a situation,
is becoming ever clearer
and more obvious with every day.

The Mensheviks
and the Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia
(like all the leaders of the Second International throughout the world,
in 1914–20)
began with treachery—
by directly or indirectly justifying “defense of country”,
i.e., the defense of their own predatory bourgeoisie.
They continued their treachery
by entering into a coalition
with the bourgeoisie
of their own country,
and fighting,
together with their own bourgeoisie,
against the revolutionary proletariat of their own country.
Their bloc,
first with Kerensky and the Cadets,
and then with Kolchak and Denikin in Russia
—
like the bloc of their confrères abroad
with the bourgeoisie of their respective countries—
was in fact desertion to the side of the bourgeoisie,
against the proletariat.
From beginning to end,
their compromise with the bandits of imperialism
meant their becoming accomplices
in imperialist banditry.

“Left-wing” communism in Germany.
The leaders, the party, the class, the masses The German Communists
we must now speak of call themselves,
not “Left-wingers”
but, if I am not mistaken, an “opposition on principle”.
From what follows below it will, however, be seen that they reveal all the symptoms
of the “infantile disorder of Leftism”.

Published by the “local group in Frankfurt am Main”,
a pamphlet reflecting the point of view of this opposition,
and entitled The split in the communist party of Germany (The Spartacus League)
sets forth the substance of this opposition’s views most saliently,
and with the utmost clarity and concision.
A few quotations will suffice to acquaint the reader with that substance:
<blockquote>“The Communist Party is the party of the most determined class struggle...”

“... Politically,
the transitional period [between capitalism and socialism]
is one of the proletarian dictatorship...
”

“... The question arises:
who is to exercise this dictatorship:
the Communist Party or the proletarian class? ...
Fundamentally,
should we strive for a dictatorship of the Communist Party,
or for a dictatorship of the proletarian class? ...
    ”</blockquote>The author of the pamphlet
goes on to accuse the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Germany
of seeking ways of achieving a coalition
with the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany,
and of raising “the question of recognizing, in principle, all political means” of struggle,
including parliamentarianism,
with the sole purpose of concealing its actual and main efforts
to form a coalition with the Independents.
The pamphlet goes on to say:
    <blockquote>“
The opposition have chosen another road.
They are of the opinion
that the question of the rule of the Communist Party
and of the dictatorship of the Party
is merely one of tactics.
In any case, rule by the Communist Party
is the ultimate form of any party rule.
Fundamentally,
we must work for the dictatorship of the proletarian class.
And all the measures of the Party, its organizations,
methods of struggle,
strategy and tactics
should be directed to that end.
Accordingly,
all compromise with other parties,
all reversion to parliamentary forms of struggle
which have become historically and politically obsolete,
and any policy of maneuvring and compromise
must be emphatically rejected.
”
“Specifically proletarian methods of revolutionary struggle
must be strongly emphasised.
New forms of organization
must be created on the widest basis
and with the widest scope
in order to enlist the most extensive proletarian circles
and strata
to take part in the revolutionary struggle
under the leadership of the Communist Party.
A Workers’ Union, based on factory organizations,
should be the rallying point
for all revolutionary elements.
This should unite all workers
who follow the slogan:
‘Get out of the trade unions!’
It is here that the militant proletariat musters its ranks for battle.
Recognition of the class struggle,
of the Soviet system and of the dictatorship
should be sufficient for enrolment.
All subsequent political education
of the fighting masses
and their political orientation in the struggle
are the task of the Communist Party,
which stands outside the Workers’ Union...

“... Consequently,
two Communist parties are now arrayed against each other:

“One is a party of leaders,
which is out to organize the revolutionary struggle
and to direct it from above,
accepting compromises and parliamentarianism
so as to create a situation
enabling it to join a coalition government
exercising a dictatorship.

“The other is a mass party,
which expects an upsurge
of the revolutionary struggle from below,
which knows and applies a single method in this struggle—
a method which clearly leads to the goal—
and rejects all parliamentary and opportunist methods.
That single method is the unconditional overthrow of the bourgeoisie,
so as then to set up the proletarian class dictatorship
for the accomplishment of socialism...

“... There—the dictatorship of leaders;
here—the dictatorship of the masses!
That is our slogan.
”</blockquote>
Such are the main features characterizing the views of the opposition in the German Communist Party.

Any Bolshevik who has consciously participated in the development of Bolshevism
since 1903
or has closely observed
that development will at once say,
after reading these arguments,
“
What old and familiar rubbish!
What ‘Left-wing’ childishness!”

But let us examine these arguments a little more closely.

The mere presentation of the question—
“dictatorship of the party or dictatorship of the class;
dictatorship (party) of the leaders,
or dictatorship (party) of the masses?”—
testifies to most incredibly and hopelessly muddled thinking.
These people want to invent something quite out of the ordinary,
and, in their effort to be clever,
make themselves ridiculous.
It is common knowledge
that the masses are divided into classes,
that the masses can be contrasted with classes
only
by contrasting the vast majority in general,
regardless of division
according to status in the social system of production,
with categories holding a definite status
in the social system of production;
that as a rule and in most cases—
at least in present-day civilized countries—
classes are led by political parties;
that political parties, as a general rule,
are run by more or less stable groups
composed of the most authoritative,
influential and experienced members,
who are elected to the most responsible positions,
and are called leaders.
All this is elementary.
All this is clear and simple.
Why replace this
with some kind of rigmarole,
some new Volapük?
On the one hand,
these people seem to have got muddled
when they found themselves in a predicament,
when the party’s abrupt transition
from legality to illegality
upset the customary,
normal and simple relations
between leaders, parties and classes.
In Germany,
as in other European countries,
people had become too accustomed to legality,
to the free and proper election of “leaders”
at regular party congresses,
to the convenient method of testing the class composition of parties
through parliamentary elections,
mass meetings the press,
the sentiments of the trade unions and other associations,
etc.
When, instead of this customary procedure,
it became necessary,
because of the stormy development of the revolution
and the development of the civil war,
to go over rapidly
from legality to illegality,
to combine the two,
and to adopt the “inconvenient”
and “undemocratic”
methods of selecting, or forming,
or preserving “groups of leaders”—
people lost their bearings
and began to think up some unmitigated nonsense.
Certain members of the Communist Party of Holland,
who were unlucky enough to be born in a small country
with traditions and conditions
of highly privileged
and highly stable legality,
and who had never seen a transition from legality to illegality,
probably fell into confusion, lost their heads,
and helped create these absurd inventions.

On the other hand,
one can see simply a thoughtless and incoherent use of the now “fashionable” terms: “masses” and “leaders”.
These people have heard and memorised a great many attacks on “leaders”,
in which the latter have been contrasted with the “masses”;
however,
they have proved unable to think matters out
and gain a clear understanding of what it was all about.

The divergence
between “leaders” and “masses”
was brought out
with particular clarity and sharpness in all countries
at the end of the imperialist war
and following it.
The principal reason for this
was explained many times
by Marx and Engels
between the years 1852 and 1892,
from the example of Britain.
That country’s exclusive position
led to the emergence,
from the “masses”,
of a semi–petty-bourgeois,
opportunist “labor aristocracy”.
The leaders of this labor aristocracy
were constantly going over to the bourgeoisie,
and were directly or indirectly on its pay roll.
Marx earned the honour
of incurring the hatred
of these disreputable persons
by openly branding them as traitors.
Present-day (twentieth-century)
imperialism
has given a few advanced countries
an exceptionally privileged position,
which, everywhere in the Second International,
has produced a certain type of traitor,
opportunist,
and social-chauvinist leaders,
who champion the interests
of their own craft,
their own section of the labor aristocracy.
The opportunist parties
have become separated from the “masses”,
i.e.,
from the broadest strata
of the working people,
their majority,
the lowest-paid workers.
The revolutionary proletariat cannot be victorious
unless this evil is combated,
unless the opportunist,
social-traitor leaders are exposed,
discredited and expelled.
That is the policy the Third International
has embarked on.

To go so far,
in this connection,
as to contrast,
in general,
the dictatorship of the masses
with a dictatorship of the leaders
is ridiculously absurd,
and stupid.
What is particularly amusing
is that, in fact, instead of the old leaders,
who hold generally accepted views
on simple matters,
new leaders are brought forth
(under cover of the slogan “Down with the leaders!”),
who talk rank stuff and nonsense.
Such are Laufenberg, Wolffheim, Horner [18], Karl Schröder, Friedrich Wendel and Karl Erler, in Germany.
Erler’s attempts to give the question
more “profundity”
and to proclaim that in general political parties
are unnecessary
and “bourgeois”
are so supremely absurd
that one can only shrug one’s shoulders.
It all goes to drive home
the truth
that a minor error
can always assume monstrous proportions
if it is persisted in,
if profound justifications
are sought for it,
and if it is carried to its logical conclusion.

Repudiation of the Party principle
and of Party discipline—
that is what the opposition has arrived at.
And this is tantamount
to completely disarming the proletariat
in the interests of the bourgeoisie.
It all adds up to that petty-bourgeois diffuseness and instability,
that incapacity for sustained effort,
unity and organized action,
which, if encouraged,
must inevitably destroy any proletarian revolutionary movement.
From the standpoint of communism,
repudiation of the Party principle
means attempting to leap
from the eve of capitalism’s collapse (in Germany),
not to the lower or the intermediate phase of communism,
but to the higher.
We in Russia
(in the third year since the overthrow of the bourgeoisie)
are making the first steps in the transition from capitalism to socialism
or the lower stage of communism.
Classes still remain,
and will remain everywhere for years
after the proletariat’s conquest of power.
Perhaps in Britain,
where there is no peasantry
(but where petty proprietors exist),
this period may be shorter.
The abolition of classes means,
not merely ousting the landowners and the capitalists—
that is something we accomplished
with comparative ease;
it also means abolishing the small commodity producers,
and they cannot be ousted,
or crushed;
we must learn to live with them.
They can (and must) be transformed
and re-educated
only
by means of very prolonged, slow, and cautious organizational work.
They surround the proletariat on every side
with a petty-bourgeois atmosphere,
which permeates and corrupts the proletariat,
and constantly causes
among the proletariat relapses
into petty-bourgeois spinelessness,
disunity, individualism,
and alternating moods
of exaltation and dejection.
The strictest centralization and discipline
are required
within the political party
of the proletariat
in order to counteract this,
in order that the organizational role of the proletariat
(and that is its principal role)
may be exercised correctly,
successfully and victoriously.
The dictatorship of the proletariat
means a persistent struggle
—
bloody and bloodless,
violent and peaceful,
military and economic, educational and administrative—
against the forces and traditions of the old society.
The force of habit in millions and tens of millions
is a most formidable force.
Without a party of iron
that has been tempered in the struggle,
a party enjoying the confidence
of all honest people
in the class in question,
a party capable of watching and influencing the mood of the masses,
such a struggle
cannot be waged successfully.
It is a thousand times easier to vanquish the centralized big bourgeoisie
than to “vanquish” the millions upon millions of petty proprietors;
however,
through their ordinary, everyday, imperceptible, elusive and demoralizing activities,
they produce the very results
which the bourgeoisie need
and which tend to restore the bourgeoisie.
Whoever brings about even the slightest weakening
of the iron discipline
of the party of the proletariat
(especially during its dictatorship),
is actually aiding the bourgeoisie
against the proletariat.

Parallel with the question of the leaders—
the party—the class—the masses,
we must pose the question
of the “reactionary” trade unions.
But first I shall take the liberty
of making a few concluding remarks
based on the experience of our Party.
There have always been attacks
on the “dictatorship of leaders” in our Party.
The first time I heard such attacks,
I recall,
was in 1895,
when, officially, no party yet existed,
but a central group was taking shape in St. Petersburg,
which was to assume the leadership of the district groups.
At the Ninth Congress of our Party (April 1920),
there was a small opposition,
which also spoke against the “dictatorship of leaders”,
against the “oligarchy”,
and so on.
There is therefore nothing surprising, new, or terrible
in the “infantile disorder”
of “Left-wing communism”
among the Germans.
The ailment involves no danger,
and after it the organism even becomes more robust.
In our case,
on the other hand,
the rapid alternation
of legal and illegal work,
which made it necessary
to keep the general staff—
the leaders—under cover and cloak them in the greatest secrecy,
sometimes gave rise to extremely dangerous consequences.
The worst of these
was that in 1912
the agent provocateur Malinovsky got into the Bolshevik Central Committee.
He betrayed scores and scores of the best and most loyal comrades,
caused them to be sentenced to penal servitude,
and hastened the death of many of them.
That he did not cause still greater harm
was due to the correct balance
between legal and illegal work.
As member of the Party’s Central Committee
and Duma deputy,
Malinovsky was forced,
in order to gain our confidence,
to help us establish legal daily papers,
which even under tsarism
were able to wage a struggle
against the Menshevik opportunism
and to spread the fundamentals of Bolshevism
in a suitably disguised form.
While, with one hand,
Malinovsky sent scores and scores of the finest Bolsheviks
to penal servitude and death,
he was obliged, with the other,
to assist in the education of scores and scores of thousands of new Bolsheviks
through the medium of the legal press.
Those German (and also British, American, French and Italian) comrades
who are faced with the task of learning how to conduct revolutionary work
within the reactionary trade unions
would do well
to give serious thought to this fact.

In many countries,
including the most advanced,
the bourgeoisie
are undoubtedly sending agents provocateurs
into the Communist parties
and will continue to do so.
A skillful combining of illegal and legal work
is one of the ways to combat this danger.

Should revolutionaries work in reactionary trade unions?
The German “Lefts”
consider that,
as far as they are concerned,
the reply to this question
is an unqualified negative.
In their opinion,
declamations and angry outcries
(such as uttered by K. Horner in a particularly “solid” and particularly stupid manner)
against “reactionary”
and “counter-revolutionary” trade unions
are sufficient “proof”
that it is unnecessary
and even inexcusable for revolutionaries and Communists
to work in yellow,
social-chauvinist,
compromising and counter-revolutionary trade unions
of the Legien type.

However firmly
the German “Lefts”
may be convinced
of the revolutionism
of such tactics,
the latter are in fact fundamentally wrong,
and contain nothing but empty phrases.

To make this clear,
I shall begin with our own experience,
in keeping with the general plan of the present pamphlet,
which is aimed at applying to Western Europe
whatever is universally practicable,
significant and relevant in the history
and the present-day tactics of Bolshevism.

In Russia today,
the connection between leaders, party, class and masses,
as well as the attitude of the dictatorship
of the proletariat and its party to the trade unions,
are concretely as follows:
the dictatorship is exercised by the proletariat organized in the Soviets;
the proletariat is guided by the Communist Party of Bolsheviks,
which, according to the figures of the latest Party Congress (April 1920),
has a membership of 611,000.
The membership varied greatly both before and after the October Revolution,
and used to be much smaller,
even in 1918 and 1919.
We are apprehensive
of an excessive growth of the Party,
because careerists and charlatans,
who deserve only to be shot,
inevitably do all they can
to insinuate themselves
into the ranks of the ruling party.
The last time we opened wide the doors of the Party—to workers and peasants only—
was when (in the winter of 1919) Yudenich
was within a few versts of Petrograd,
and Denikin was in Orel (about 350 versts from Moscow),
i.e.,
when the Soviet Republic was in mortal danger,
and when adventurers, careerists, charlatans and unreliable persons
generally could not possibly count
on making a profitable career
(and had more reason to expect the gallows and torture)
by joining the Communists.
The Party,
which holds annual congresses
(the most recent on the basis of one delegate per 1,000 members),
is directed by a Central Committee of nineteen elected at the Congress,
while the current work in Moscow
has to be carried on by still smaller bodies,
known as the Organising Bureau
and the Political Bureau,
which are elected at plenary meetings
of the Central Committee,
five members of the Central Committee to each bureau.
This, it would appear,
is a full-fledged “oligarchy”.
No important political or organizational question
is decided
by any state institution in our republic
without the guidance of the Party’s Central Committee.

In its work,
the Party relies directly on the trade unions,
which, according to the data of the last congress (April 1920),
now have a membership of over four million
and are formally non-Party.
Actually,
all the directing bodies
of the vast majority of the unions,
and primarily, of course,
of the all-Russia general trade union centre
or bureau
(the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions),
are made up of Communists
and carry out all the directives of the Party.
Thus, on the whole,
we have a formally non-communist,
flexible and relatively wide
and very powerful proletarian apparatus,
by means of which the Party is closely linked up with the class and the masses,
and by means of which, under the leadership of the Party,
the class dictatorship is exercised.
Without close contacts
with the trade unions,
and without their energetic support
and devoted efforts,
not only in economic, but also in military affairs,
it would of course have been impossible for us
to govern the country
and to maintain the dictatorship
for two and a half months,
let alone two and a half years.
In practice,
these very close contacts
naturally
call for highly complex and diversified work
in the form of propaganda,
agitation, timely and frequent conferences,
not only with the leading trade union workers,
but with influential trade union workers generally;
they call for a determined struggle
against the Mensheviks,
who still have a certain though very small following to whom they teach all kinds of counter-revolutionary machinations,
ranging from an ideological defense of (bourgeois) democracy
and the preaching
that the trade unions
should be “independent”
(independent of proletarian state power!)
to sabotage of proletarian discipline, etc.,
etc.

We consider that contacts with the “masses”
through the trade unions
are not enough.
In the course of our revolution,
practical activities have given rise to such institutions
as non-Party workers’ and peasants’ conferences,
and we strive by every means to support,
develop and extend this institution
in order to be able to observe the temper of the masses,
come closer to them,
meet their requirements,
promote the best among them
to state posts, etc.
Under a recent decree
on the transformation of the People’s Commissariat of State Control
into the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection,
non-Party conferences of this kind
have been empowered
to select members of the State Control
to carry out various kinds of investigations, etc.

Then, of course,
all the work of the Party is carried on through the Soviets,
which embrace the working masses
irrespective of occupation.
The district congresses of Soviets
are democratic institutions,
the like of which even the best of the democratic republics
of the bourgeois world
have never known;
through these congresses
(whose proceedings the Party endeavours to follow with the closest attention),
as well as by continually appointing class-conscious workers
to various posts in the rural districts,
the proletariat exercises its role of leader of the peasantry,
gives effect to the dictatorship
of the urban proletariat
wages a systematic struggle
against the rich, bourgeois, exploiting and profiteering peasantry, etc.

Such is the general mechanism
of the proletarian state power
viewed “from above”,
from the standpoint of the practical implementation of the dictatorship.
We hope that the reader will understand why the Russian Bolshevik who has known this mechanism for twenty-five years
and has seen it develop out of small, illegal and underground circles,
cannot help regarding all this talk
about “from above”
or “from below”,
about the dictatorship of leaders or the dictatorship of the masses, etc.,
as ridiculous and childish nonsense,
something like discussing
whether a man’s left leg or right arm
is of greater use to him.

We cannot but regard as equally ridiculous and childish nonsense
the pompous,
very learned,
and frightfully revolutionary disquisitions
of the German Lefts
to the effect that Communists cannot and should not work in reactionary trade unions,
that it is permissible
to turn down such work,
that it is necessary to withdraw from the trade unions
and create a brand-new and immaculate “Workers’ Union”
invented by very pleasant (and, probably, for the most part very youthful) Communists, etc., etc.

Capitalism inevitably leaves socialism the legacy,
on the one hand,
of the old trade and craft distinctions
among the workers,
distinctions evolved in the course of centuries;
on the other hand,
trade unions,
which only very slowly,
in the course of years and years,
can and will develop
into broader industrial unions
with less of the craft union about them
(embracing entire industries,
and not only crafts, trades and occupations),
and later proceed,
through these industrial unions,
to eliminate the division of labor among people,
to educate and school people,
give them all-round development
and an all-round training,
so that they are able to do everything.
Communism is advancing
and must advance towards that goal,
and will reach it,
but only after very many years.
To attempt in practice,
today,
to anticipate this future
result
of a fully developed,
fully stabilized and constituted,
fully comprehensive and mature communism
would be like trying
to teach higher mathematics
to a child of four.

We can (and must)
begin to build socialism,
not with abstract human material,
or with human material
specially prepared by us,
but with the human material bequeathed to us by capitalism.
True, that is no easy matter,
but no other approach to this task
is serious enough
to warrant discussion.

The trade unions
were a tremendous step forward
for the working class
in the early days of capitalist development,
inasmuch
as they marked a transition
from the workers’ disunity and helplessness
to the rudiments of class organization.
When the revolutionary party of the proletariat,
the highest form of proletarian class organization,
began to take shape
(and the Party will not merit the name
until it learns to weld the leaders
into one indivisible whole with the class and the masses)
the trade unions
inevitably began to reveal certain reactionary features,
a certain craft narrow-mindedness,
a certain tendency to be non-political,
a certain inertness, etc.
However,
the development of the proletariat did not,
and could not,
proceed anywhere in the world otherwise than through the trade unions,
through reciprocal action between them and the party of the working class.
The proletariat’s conquest of political power
is a gigantic step forward
for the proletariat as a class,
and the Party must more than ever and in a new way,
not only in the old,
educate and guide the trade unions,
at the same time
bearing in mind that they are and will long remain an indispensable “school of communism”
and a preparatory school
that trains proletarians to exercise their dictatorship,
an indispensable organization of the workers
for the gradual transfer
of the management of the whole economic life of the country
to the working class
(and not to the separate trades),
and later to all the working people.

In the sense mentioned above,
a certain “reactionism”
in the trade unions
is inevitable
under the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Not to understand this means a complete failure
to understand the fundamental conditions
of the transition from capitalism to socialism.
It would be egregious folly
to fear this “reactionism”
or to try to evade or leap over it,
for it would mean fearing that function of the proletarian vanguard
which consists in training, educating, enlightening and drawing into the new life
the most backward strata and masses of the working class and the peasantry.
On the other hand,
it would be a still graver error
to postpone the achievement
of the dictatorship of the proletariat
until a time when there will not be a single worker
with a narrow-minded craft outlook,
or with craft and craft-union prejudices.
The art of politics
(and the Communist’s correct understanding of his tasks)
consists in correctly gauging the conditions
and the moment when the vanguard of the proletariat
can successfully assume power,
when it is able—
during and after the seizure of power—
to win adequate support
from sufficiently broad strata of the working class
and of the non-proletarian working masses,
and when it is able thereafter
to maintain,
consolidate and extend its rule
by educating,
training and attracting ever broader masses of the working people.

Further.
In countries more advanced than Russia,
a certain reactionism in the trade unions
has been and was bound to be manifested in a far greater measure
than in our country.
Our Mensheviks found support in the trade unions
(and to some extent still do so in a small number of unions),
as a result of the latter’s craft narrow-mindedness,
craft selfishness and opportunism.
The Mensheviks of the West
have acquired a much firmer footing
in the trade unions;
there the craft-union,
narrow-minded, selfish, case-hardened, covetous,
and petty-bourgeois “labor aristocracy”,
imperialist-minded,
and imperialist-corrupted,
has developed into a much stronger section
than in our country.
That is incontestable.
The struggle against the Gomperses,
and against the Jouhaux, Hendersons, Merrheims, Legiens and Co.
in Western Europe
is much more difficult
than the struggle against our Mensheviks,
who are an absolutely homogeneous social and political type.
This struggle must be waged ruthlessly,
and it must unfailingly be brought—
as we brought it—
to a point when all the incorrigible leaders
of opportunism
and social-chauvinism
are completely discredited
and driven out of the trade unions.
Political power cannot be captured
(and the attempt to capture it should not be made)
until the struggle
has reached a certain stage.
This “certain stage”
will be different
in different countries
and in different circumstances;
it can be correctly gauged only by thoughtful,
experienced and knowledgeable political leaders
of the proletariat in each particular country.

(In Russia the elections to the Constituent Assembly in November 1917,
a few days after the proletarian revolution of October 25, 1917,
were one of the criteria of the success of this struggle.
In these elections
the Mensheviks
were utterly defeated;
they received 700,000 votes—1,400,000 if the vote in Transcaucasia
is added—
as against 9,000,000 votes polled by the Bolsheviks.
See my article, “The Constituent Assembly Elections
and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat”,
in the Communist International No. 7–8.)

We are waging a struggle
against the “labor aristocracy”
in the name of the masses of the workers and in order to win them over to our side;
we are waging the struggle
against the opportunist and social-chauvinist leaders
in order to win the working class over to our side.
It would be absurd
to forget this most elementary and most self-evident truth.
Yet it is this very absurdity
that the German “Left” Communists perpetrate when,
because of the reactionary and counter-revolutionary character
of the trade union top leadership,
they jump to the conclusion that ...
we must withdraw from the trade unions,
refuse to work in them,
and create new and artificial forms of labor organization!
This is so unpardonable a blunder
that it is tantamount to the greatest service Communists
could render the bourgeoisie.
Like all the opportunist, social-chauvinist,
and Kautskyite trade union leaders,
our Mensheviks are nothing but “agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement”
(as we have always said the Mensheviks are),
or “labor lieutenants of the capitalist class”,
to use the splendid and profoundly true expression
of the followers of Daniel De Leon in America.
To refuse to work in the reactionary trade unions
means leaving the insufficiently developed or backward masses of workers
under the influence of the reactionary leaders,
the agents of the bourgeoisie,
the labor aristocrats,
or “workers who have become completely bourgeois”
(cf. Engels’s letter to Marx in 1858 about the British workers).

This ridiculous “theory”
that Communists should not work in reactionary trade unions
reveals with the utmost clarity
the frivolous attitude
of the “Left” Communists
towards the question of influencing the “masses”,
and their misuse of clamour
about the “masses”.
If you want to help the “masses”
and win the sympathy and support of the “masses”,
you should not fear difficulties,
or pinpricks, chicanery,
insults and persecution
from the “leaders”
(who, being opportunists and social-chauvinists,
are in most cases directly or indirectly connected with the bourgeoisie and the police),
but must absolutely work wherever the masses are to be found.
You must be capable of any sacrifice,
of overcoming the greatest obstacles,
in order to carry on agitation and propaganda systematically,
perseveringly,
persistently and patiently in those institutions, societies and associations—
even the most reactionary—
in which proletarian or semi-proletarian masses
are to be found.
The trade unions and the workers’ co-operatives
(the latter sometimes, at least)
are the very organizations in which the masses are to be found.
According to figures quoted in the Swedish paper Folkets Dagblad Politiken of March 10, 1920,
the trade union membership in Great Britain
increased from 5,500,000 at the end of 1917 to 6,600,000
at the end of 1918,
an increase of 19 per cent.
Towards the close of 1919,
the membership was estimated at 7,500,000.
I have not got the corresponding figures for France and Germany to hand,
but absolutely incontestable
and generally known facts
testify to a rapid rise in the trade union membership in these countries too.

These facts
make crystal clear
something that is confirmed by thousands of other symptoms,
namely,
that class-consciousness
and the desire for organization
are growing
among the proletarian masses,
among the rank and file,
among the backward elements.
Millions of workers in Great Britain, France and Germany
are for the first time
passing
from a complete lack of organization
to the elementary, lowest, simplest,
and (to those still thoroughly imbued with bourgeois-democratic prejudices)
most easily comprehensible form of organization,
namely, the trade unions;
yet the revolutionary but imprudent Left Communists
stand by,
crying out “the masses”, “the masses!”
but refusing to work within the trade unions,
on the pretext that they are “reactionary”,
and invent a brand-new,
immaculate little “Workers’ Union”,
which is guiltless
of bourgeois-democratic prejudices
and innocent
of craft or narrow-minded craft-union sins,
a union which, they claim,
will be (!) a broad organization.
“Recognition of the Soviet system and the dictatorship”
will be the only (!) condition of membership.
(See the passage quoted above.)

It would be hard to imagine any greater ineptitude
or greater harm to the revolution
than that caused by the “Left” revolutionaries!
Why, if we in Russia today,
after two and a half years of unprecedented victories
over the bourgeoisie of Russia and the Entente,
were to make “recognition of the dictatorship”
a condition of trade union membership,
we would be doing a very foolish thing,
damaging our influence among the masses,
and helping the Mensheviks.
The task devolving on Communists
is to convince the backward elements,
to work among them,
and not to fence themselves off from them
with artificial and childishly “Left” slogans.

There can be no doubt
that the Gomperses, the Hendersons,
the Jouhaux and the Legiens
are very grateful
to those “Left” revolutionaries
who, like the German opposition “on principle”
(heaven preserve us from such “principles”!),
or like some of the revolutionaries
in the American Industrial Workers of the World advocate
quitting the reactionary trade unions
and refusing to work in them.
These men, the “leaders”
of opportunism,
will no doubt resort to every device of bourgeois diplomacy
and to the aid of bourgeois governments,
the clergy, the police and the courts,
to keep Communists out of the trade unions,
oust them by every means,
make their work in the trade unions
as unpleasant as possible,
and insult,
bait and persecute them.
We must be able to stand up to all this,
agree to make any sacrifice,
and even—if need be—
to resort to various stratagems,
artifices and illegal methods,
to evasions and subterfuges,
as long as we get into the trade unions,
remain in them,
and carry on communist work within them
at all costs.
Under tsarism
we had no “legal opportunities” whatsoever
until 1905.
However,
when Zubatov,
agent of the secret police,
organized Black-Hundred workers’ assemblies
and workingmen’s societies
for the purpose of trapping revolutionaries
and combating them,
we sent members of our Party to these assemblies
and into these societies
(I personally remember one of them, Comrade Babushkin,
a leading St. Petersburg factory worker,
shot by order of the tsar’s generals in 1906).
They established contacts with the masses,
were able to carry on their agitation,
and succeeded in wresting workers
from the influence of Zubatov’s agents.
Of course,
in Western Europe,
which is imbued
with most deep-rooted legalistic,
constitutionalist and bourgeois-democratic prejudices,
this is more difficult of achievement.
However,
it can and must be carried out,
and systematically at that.

The Executive Committee of the Third International
must, in my opinion,
positively condemn,
and call upon the next congress
of the Communist International
to condemn both the policy of refusing to work in reactionary trade unions
in general
(explaining in detail why such refusal is unwise,
and what extreme harm it does to the cause of the proletarian revolution)
and, in particular, the line of conduct
of some members of the Communist Party of Holland,
who—
whether directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, wholly or partly,
it does not matter—
have supported this erroneous policy.
The Third International
must break with the tactics of the Second International,
it must not evade or play down points at issue,
but must pose them in a straightforward fashion.
The whole truth has been put squarely to the “Independents” (the );
the whole truth
must likewise be put squarely to the “Left” Communists.

Should we participate in bourgeois parliaments?
It is with the utmost contempt—
and the utmost levity—
that the German “Left”
Communists reply to this question in the negative.
Their arguments?
In the passage quoted above we read:
<blockquote>“...
All reversion to parliamentary forms of struggle,
which have become historically and politically obsolete,
must be emphatically rejected...
”</blockquote>
This is said with ridiculous pretentiousness,
and is patently wrong.
“Reversion” to parliamentarianism,
forsooth!
Perhaps there is already a Soviet republic in Germany?
It does not look like it!
How, then,
can one speak of “reversion”?
Is this not an empty phrase?

Parliamentarianism
has become “historically obsolete”.
That is true in the propaganda sense.
However,
everybody knows that this is still a far cry
from overcoming it in practice.
Capitalism could have been declared—
and with full justice—
to be “historically obsolete”
many decades ago,
but that does not at all
remove the need for a very long and very persistent struggle
on the basis of capitalism.
Parliamentarianism is “historically obsolete”
from the standpoint of world history,
i.e., the era of bourgeois parliamentarianism is over,
and the era of the proletarian dictatorship
has begun.
That is incontestable.
But world history is counted in decades.
Ten or twenty years earlier
or later
makes no difference
when measured with the yardstick of world history;
from the standpoint of world history
it is a trifle
that cannot be considered even approximately.
But for that very reason,
it is a glaring theoretical error
to apply the yardstick of world history
to practical politics.

Is parliamentarianism “politically obsolete”?
That is quite a different matter.
If that were true,
the position of the “Lefts”
would be a strong one.
But it has to be proved by a most searching analysis,
and the “Lefts”
do not even know how to approach the matter.
In the “Theses on Parliamentarianism”,
published in the Bulletin of the Provisional Bureau in Amsterdam
of the Communist International No. 1, February 1920,
and obviously expressing the Dutch-Left or Left-Dutch strivings,
the analysis, as we shall see,
is also hopelessly poor.

In the first place,
contrary to the opinion
of such outstanding political leaders
as Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht,
the German “Lefts”,
as we know,
considered parliamentarianism “politically obsolete”
even in January 1919.
We know that the “Lefts”
were mistaken.
This fact alone utterly destroys,
at a single stroke,
the proposition that parliamentarianism is “politically obsolete”.
It is for the “Lefts”
to prove why their error,
indisputable at that time,
is no longer an error.
They do not and cannot produce even a shred of proof.
A political party’s attitude towards its own mistakes
is one of the most important
and surest ways
of judging how earnest the party is
and how it fulfils in practice its obligations
towards its class and the working people.
Frankly acknowledging a mistake,
ascertaining the reasons for it,
analyzing the conditions that have led up to it,
and thrashing out the means of its rectification—
that is the hallmark of a serious party;
that is how it should perform its duties,
and how it should educate and train its class,
and then the masses.
By failing to fulfil this duty
and give the utmost attention
and consideration
to the study of their patent error,
the “Lefts” in Germany
(and in Holland)
have proved that they are not a party of a class,
but a circle,
not a party of the masses,
but a group of intellectualists
and of a few workers
who ape the worst features of intellectualism.

Second,
in the same pamphlet
of the Frankfurt group of “Lefts”,
which we have already cited in detail,
we read:
    <blockquote>“...
The millions of workers
who still follow the policy of the Centre [the Catholic ‘Centre’ Party]
are counter-revolutionary.
The rural proletarians provide the legions of counter-revolutionary troops.
”
(Page 3 of the pamphlet.)</blockquote>
Everything goes to show that this statement
is far too sweeping and exaggerated.
But the basic fact set forth
here is incontrovertible,
and its acknowledgment by the “Lefts”
is particularly clear evidence of their mistake.
How can one say that “parliamentarianism is politically obsolete”,
when “millions” and “legions” of proletarians
are not only still in favour of parliamentarianism in general,
but are downright “counter-revolutionary”!?
It is obvious
that parliamentarianism in Germany
is not yet politically obsolete.
It is obvious
that the “Lefts” in Germany
have mistaken their desire,
their politico-ideological attitude,
for objective reality.
That is a most dangerous mistake
for revolutionaries to make.
In Russia—
where,
over a particularly long period
and in particularly varied forms,
the most brutal and savage yoke of tsarism
produced revolutionaries of diverse shades,
revolutionaries who displayed amazing devotion, enthusiasm, heroism and will power—
in Russia
we have observed this mistake of the revolutionaries
at very close quarters;
we have studied it very attentively
and have a first-hand knowledge of it;
that is why we can also see it especially clearly in others.
Parliamentarianism is of course “politically obsolete”
to the Communists in Germany;
but—and that is the whole point—
we must not regard what is obsolete to us
as something obsolete to a class,
to the masses.
Here again we find that the “Lefts”
do not know how to reason,
do not know how to act as the party of a class,
as the party of the masses.
You must not sink to the level of the masses,
to the level of the backward strata of the class.
That is incontestable.
You must tell them the bitter truth.
You are in duty bound
to call their bourgeois-democratic and parliamentary prejudices what they are—prejudices.
But at the same time
you must soberly follow the actual state of the class-consciousness
and preparedness of the entire class
(not only of its communist vanguard),
and of all the working people
(not only of their advanced elements).

Even if only a fairly large minority
of the industrial workers,
and not “millions” and “legions”,
follow the lead of the Catholic clergy—
and a similar minority of rural workers
follow the landowners and kulaks (Großbauern)—
it undoubtedly signifies that parliamentarianism in Germany
has not yet politically outlived itself,
that participation in parliamentary elections
and in the struggle on the parliamentary rostrum
is obligatory
on the party of the revolutionary proletariat
specifically for the purpose of educating the backward strata
of its own class,
and for the purpose of awakening
and enlightening the undeveloped,
downtrodden and ignorant rural masses.
Whilst you lack the strength to do away with bourgeois parliaments
and every other type of reactionary institution,
you must work within them
because it is there that you will still find workers
who are duped by the priests
and stultified by the conditions of rural life;
otherwise you risk turning into nothing but windbags.

Third,
the “Left” Communists have a great deal to say in praise of us Bolsheviks.
One sometimes feels like telling them
to praise us less
and to try to get a better knowledge of the Bolsheviks’ tactics.
We took part in the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
the Russian bourgeois parliament in September–November 1917.
Were our tactics correct or not?
If not,
then this should be clearly stated and proved,
for it is necessary
in evolving the correct tactics
for international communism.
If they were correct,
then certain conclusions must be drawn.
Of course,
there can be no question
of placing conditions in Russia
on a par with conditions in Western Europe.
But as regards the particular question
of the meaning of the concept
that “parliamentarianism
has become politically obsolete”,
due account should be taken of our experience,
for unless concrete experience
is taken into account
such concepts
very easily
turn into empty phrases.
In September–November 1917,
did we, the Russian Bolsheviks,
not have more right
than any Western Communists
to consider that parliamentarianism
was politically obsolete in Russia?
Of course we did,
for the point is not whether bourgeois parliaments
have existed
for a long time or a short time,
but how far the masses of the working people
are prepared (ideologically, politically and practically)
to accept the Soviet system
and to dissolve the bourgeois-democratic parliament
(or allow it to be dissolved).
It is an absolutely incontestable
and fully established
historical fact
that,
in September–November 1917,
the urban working class
and the soldiers and peasants of Russia
were,
because of a number of special conditions,
exceptionally well prepared to accept the Soviet system
and to disband the most democratic of bourgeois parliaments.
Nevertheless,
the Bolsheviks did not boycott the Constituent Assembly,
but took part in the elections both before and after the proletariat conquered political power.
That these elections
yielded exceedingly valuable
(and to the proletariat,
highly useful)
political results
has,
I make bold to hope,
been proved by me
in the above-mentioned article,
which analyzes in detail
the returns of the elections to the Constituent Assembly in Russia.

The conclusion
which follows from this is absolutely incontrovertible:
it has been proved that,
far from causing harm
to the revolutionary proletariat,
participation in a bourgeois-democratic parliament,
even a few weeks before the victory of a Soviet republic
and even after such a victory,
actually helps that proletariat
to prove to the backward masses
why such parliaments deserve to be done away with;
it facilitates their successful dissolution,
and helps to make bourgeois parliamentarianism “politically obsolete”.
To ignore this experience,
while at the same time
claiming affiliation to the Communist International,
which must work out its tactics internationally
(not as narrow or exclusively national tactics,
but as international tactics),
means committing a gross error
and actually abandoning internationalism in deed,
while recognizing it in word.

Now let us examine the “Dutch-Left” arguments
in favour of non-participation in parliaments.
The following is the text of Thesis No. 4,
the most important
of the above-mentioned “Dutch” theses:
<blockquote>“
When the capitalist system of production
has broken down,
and society is in a state of revolution,
parliamentary action gradually loses importance
as compared with the action of the masses themselves.
When, in these conditions,
parliament becomes the centre and organ of the counter-revolution,
whilst, on the other hand,
the laboring class
builds up the instruments of its power in the Soviets,
it may even prove necessary
to abstain from all and any participation in parliamentary action.
”</blockquote>
The first sentence is obviously wrong,
since action by the masses,
a big strike, for instance,
is more important than parliamentary activity at all times,
and not only during a revolution or in a revolutionary situation.
This obviously untenable
and historically and politically incorrect argument
merely
shows very clearly
that the authors completely ignore
both the general European experience
(the French experience before the revolutions of 1848 and 1870;
the German experience of 1878–90, etc.)
and the Russian experience
(see above)
of the importance of combining legal and illegal struggle.
This question is of immense importance
both in general and in particular,
because in all civilized and advanced countries
the time is rapidly approaching
when such a combination
will more and more become—
and has already partly become—
mandatory on the party of the revolutionary proletariat,
inasmuch as civil war
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie
is maturing and is imminent,
and because of savage persecution of the Communists
by republican governments and bourgeois governments
generally,
which resort to any violation of legality
(the example of America is edifying enough),
etc.
The Dutch, and the Lefts in general,
have utterly failed
to understand this highly important question.

The second sentence is,
in the first place,
historically wrong.
We Bolsheviks participated in the most counterrevolutionary parliaments,
and experience
has shown that this participation
was not only useful but indispensable
to the party of the revolutionary proletariat,
after the first bourgeois revolution in Russia (1905),
so as to pave the way for the second bourgeois revolution (February 1917),
and then for the socialist revolution (October 1917).
In the second place,
this sentence is amazingly illogical.
If a parliament becomes an organ
and a “centre”
(in reality it never has been and never can be a “centre”,
but that is by the way)
of counter-revolution,
while the workers are building up the instruments of their power
in the form of the Soviets,
then it follows
that the workers must prepare—
ideologically, politically and technically—
for the struggle of the Soviets against parliament,
for the dispersal of parliament by the Soviets.
But it does not at all
follow
that this dispersal
is hindered,
or is not facilitated,
by the presence of a Soviet opposition
within the counter-revolutionary parliament.
In the course of our victorious struggle
against Denikin and Kolchak,
we never found that
the existence of a Soviet and proletarian opposition in their camp
was immaterial
to our victories.
We know perfectly well
that
the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly
on January 5, 1918
was not hampered
but was actually facilitated
by the fact that,
within the counter-revolutionary Constituent Assembly
which was about to be dispersed,
there was a consistent Bolshevik,
as well as an inconsistent,
Left Socialist-Revolutionary Soviet opposition.
The authors of the theses
are engaged in muddled thinking;
they have forgotten the experience
of many, if not all, revolutions,
which shows the great usefulness,
during a revolution,
of a combination of mass action
outside a reactionary parliament
with an opposition sympathetic to (or, better still, directly supporting) the revolution within it.
The Dutch,
and the “Lefts” in general,
argue in this respect
like doctrinaires of the revolution,
who have never taken part in a real revolution,
have never given thought to the history of revolutions,
or have naïvely mistaken
subjective “rejection”
of a reactionary institution
for its actual destruction
by the combined operation
of a number of objective factors.
The surest way of discrediting
and damaging a new political (and not only political) idea
is to reduce it to absurdity
on the plea of defending it.
For any truth,
if “overdone”
(as Dietzgen Senior put it),
if exaggerated,
or if carried beyond the limits
of its actual applicability,
can be reduced to an absurdity,
and is even bound
to become an absurdity
under these conditions.
That is just the kind of disservice
the Dutch and German Lefts
are rendering to the new truth
of the Soviet form of government
being superior to bourgeois-democratic parliaments.
Of course,
anyone would be in error
who voiced the outmoded viewpoint
or in general considered it impermissible,
in all and any circumstances,
to reject participation in bourgeois parliaments.
I cannot attempt here
to formulate the conditions
under which a boycott is useful,
since the object of this pamphlet
is far more modest,
namely,
to study Russian experience
in connection with certain topical questions
of international communist tactics.
Russian experience
has provided us
with one successful and correct instance (1905),
and another that was incorrect (1906),
of the use of a boycott by the Bolsheviks.
Analyzing the first case,
we, see that we succeeded in preventing a reactionary government
from convening a reactionary parliament
in a situation in which extra-parliamentary revolutionary mass action (strikes in particular)
was developing at great speed,
when not a single section of the proletariat and the peasantry
could support the reactionary government
in any way,
and when the revolutionary proletariat was gaining influence
over the backward masses
through the strike struggle
and through the agrarian movement.
It is quite obvious
that this experience
is not applicable
to present-day European conditions.
It is likewise quite obvious—
and the foregoing arguments
bear this out—
that the advocacy,
even if with reservations,
by the Dutch and the other “Lefts”
of refusal to participate in parliaments
is fundamentally wrong
and detrimental to the cause of the revolutionary proletariat.

In Western Europe and America,
parliament has become most odious
to the revolutionary vanguard
of the working class.
That cannot be denied.
It can readily be understood,
for it is difficult to imagine anything more infamous,
vile or treacherous
than the behaviour
of the vast majority
of socialist and Social-Democratic parliamentary deputies
during and after the war.
It would, however,
be not only unreasonable
but actually criminal
to yield to this mood
when deciding how this generally recognized evil
should be fought.
In many countries of Western Europe,
the revolutionary mood,
we might say,
is at present a “novelty”,
or a “rarity”,
which has all too long been vainly and impatiently awaited;
perhaps that is why people so easily yield to that mood.
Certainly, without a revolutionary mood among the masses,
and without conditions
facilitating the growth of this mood,
revolutionary tactics will never develop into action.
In Russia, however,
lengthy, painful and sanguinary experience
has taught us
the truth
that revolutionary tactics
cannot be built on a revolutionary mood alone.
Tactics must be based on a sober and strictly objective appraisal
of all the class forces
in a particular state
(and of the states that surround it,
and of all states the world over)
as well as of the experience of revolutionary movements.
It is very easy
to show one’s “revolutionary”
temper
merely by hurling abuse
at parliamentary opportunism,
or merely by repudiating participation in parliaments;
its very ease, however,
cannot turn this into a solution of a difficult,
a very difficult, problem.
It is far more difficult
to create a really revolutionary parliamentary group
in a European parliament
than it was in Russia.
That stands to reason.
But it is only a particular expression
of the general truth
that it was easy for Russia,
in the specific and historically unique situation of 1917,
to start the socialist revolution,
but it will be more difficult for Russia
than for the European countries
to continue the revolution
and bring it to its consummation.
I had occasion to point this out already at the beginning of 1918,
and our experience of the past two years
has entirely confirmed the correctness of this view.
Certain specific conditions,
viz., (1) the possibility of linking up the Soviet revolution
with the ending,
as a consequence of this revolution,
of the imperialist war,
which had exhausted the workers and peasants to an incredible degree;
(2) the possibility of taking temporary advantage
of the mortal conflict
between the world’s two most powerful groups of imperialist robbers,
who were unable to unite against their Soviet enemy;
(3) the possibility
of enduring a comparatively lengthy civil war,
partly owing to the enormous size of the country
and to the poor means of communication;
(4) the existence of such a profound bourgeois-democratic revolutionary movement
among the peasantry
that the party of the proletariat
was able to adopt the revolutionary demands
of the peasant party
(the Socialist-Revolutionary Party,
the majority of whose members were definitely hostile to Bolshevism)
and realize them at once,
thanks to the conquest of political power
by the proletariat—
all these specific conditions
do not at present
exist in Western Europe,
and a repetition of such or similar conditions
will not occur so easily.
Incidentally,
apart from a number of other causes,
that is why it is more difficult for Western Europe
to start a socialist revolution
than it was for us.
To attempt to “circumvent”
this difficulty
by “skipping” the arduous job
of utilising reactionary parliaments
for revolutionary purposes
is absolutely childish.
You want to create a new society,
yet you fear the difficulties
involved
in forming a good parliamentary group
made up of convinced,
devoted and heroic Communists,
in a reactionary parliament!
Is that not childish?
If Karl Liebknecht in Germany and Z. Höglund in Sweden
were able,
even without mass support from below,
to set examples of the truly revolutionary utilisation
of reactionary parliaments,
why should a rapidly growing revolutionary mass party,
in the midst of the post-war disillusionment
and embitterment of the masses,
be unable to forge a communist group
in the worst of parliaments?
It is because, in Western Europe,
the backward masses of the workers and—to an even greater degree—
of the small peasants
are much more imbued with bourgeois-democratic and parliamentary prejudices
than they were in Russia
because of that,
it is only from within such institutions
as bourgeois parliaments
that Communists can (and must)
wage a long and persistent struggle,
undaunted by any difficulties,
to expose, dispel and overcome these prejudices.

The German “Lefts”
complain of bad “leaders” in their party,
give way to despair,
and even arrive at a ridiculous “negation” of “leaders”.
But in conditions in which it is often necessary
to hide “leaders” underground,
the evolution of good “leaders”,
reliable, tested and authoritative,
is a very difficult matter;
these difficulties cannot be successfully overcome
without combining legal and illegal work,
and without testing the “leaders”,
among other ways, in parliaments.
Criticism—the most keen, ruthless and uncompromising criticism—
should be directed,
not against parliamentarianism or parliamentary activities,
but against those leaders
who are unable—
and still more against those who are unwilling—
to utilise parliamentary elections
and the parliamentary rostrum
in a revolutionary and communist manner.
Only such criticism—
combined, of course,
with the dismissal of incapable leaders
and their replacement
by capable ones—
will constitute useful and fruitful revolutionary work
that will simultaneously train the “leaders”
to be worthy of the working class
and of all working people,
and train the masses
to be able properly
to understand the political situation
and the often very complicated
and intricate tasks
that spring from that situation.

No compromises?
In the quotation
from the Frankfurt pamphlet,
we have seen how emphatically the “Lefts”
have advanced this slogan.
It is sad to see people who no doubt consider themselves Marxists,
and want to be Marxists,
forget the fundamental truths of Marxism.
This is what Engels—
who, like Marx,
was one of those rarest of authors
whose every sentence in every one of their fundamental works
contains a remarkably profound content—
wrote in 1874,
against the manifesto of the thirty-three Blanquist Communards:
<blockquote>“‘We are Communists’ [the Blanquist Communards wrote in their manifesto],
‘
because we want to attain our goal
without stopping at intermediate stations,
without any compromises,
which only postpone the day of victory
and prolong the period of slavery.
’

“The German Communists are Communists because,
through all the intermediate stations
and all compromises created,
not by them but by the course of historical development,
they clearly perceive and constantly pursue the final aim—
the abolition of classes
and the creation of a society in which there will no longer be private ownership of land or of the means of production.
The thirty-three Blanquists are Communists
just because they imagine that,
merely because they want to skip the intermediate stations and compromises,
the matter is settled,
and if ‘it begins’
in the next few days—
which they take for granted—
and they take over power,
‘communism will be introduced’ the day after tomorrow.
If that is not immediately possible,
they are not Communists.

“
What childish innocence
it is to present one’s own impatience
as a theoretically convincing argument!”</blockquote>
In the same article,
Engels expresses his profound esteem for Vaillant,
and speaks of the “unquestionable merit”
of the latter
(who, like Guesde, was one of the most prominent leaders of international socialism
until their betrayal of socialism in August 1914).
But Engels does not fail
to give a detailed analysis
of an obvious error.
Of course,
to very young and inexperienced revolutionaries,
as well as to petty-bourgeois revolutionaries
of even very respectable age
and great experience,
it seems extremely “dangerous”,
incomprehensible and wrong to “permit compromises”.
Many sophists
(being unusually or excessively “experienced” politicians)
reason
exactly in the same way as the British leaders
of opportunism
mentioned by Comrade Lansbury:
“
If the Bolsheviks are permitted a certain compromise,
why should we not be permitted any kind of compromise?”
However,
proletarians schooled in numerous strikes
(to take only this manifestation of the class struggle)
usually assimilate
in admirable fashion
the very profound truth
(philosophical, historical, political and psychological)
expounded by Engels.
Every proletarian has been through strikes
and has experienced “compromises”
with the hated oppressors and exploiters,
when the workers have had to return to work
either without having achieved anything or else
agreeing to only a partial satisfaction of their demands.
Every proletarian—
as a result of the conditions of the mass struggle
and the acute intensification
of class antagonisms
he lives among—
sees the difference
between a compromise
enforced by objective conditions
(such as lack of strike funds,
no outside support, starvation and exhaustion)—
a compromise
which in no way minimises the revolutionary devotion
and readiness
to carry on the struggle
on the part of the workers
who have agreed to such a compromise—
and, on the other hand,
a compromise by traitors
who try to ascribe to objective causes
their self-interest
(strike-breakers also enter into “compromises”!),
their cowardice,
desire to toady to the capitalists,
and readiness to yield to intimidation,
sometimes to persuasion,
sometimes to sops,
and sometimes to flattery from the capitalists.
(The history of the British labor movement
provides a very large number of instances of such treacherous compromises
by British trade union leaders,
but, in one form or another, almost all workers in all countries
have witnessed the same sort of thing.
)

Naturally,
there are individual cases
of exceptional difficulty and complexity,
when the greatest efforts
are necessary
for a proper assessment
of the actual character of this or that “compromise”,
just as there are cases of homicide
when it is by no means easy to establish
whether the homicide was fully justified
and even necessary
(as, for example, legitimate self-defense),
or due to unpardonable negligence,
or even to a cunningly executed perfidious plan.
Of course, in politics,
where it is sometimes a matter of extremely complex relations
—
national and international—
between classes and parties,
very many cases will arise
that will be much more difficult
than the question of a legitimate “compromise”
in a strike or a treacherous “compromise”
by a strike-breaker, treacherous leader, etc.
It would be absurd
to formulate a recipe or general rule (“No compromises!”)
to suit all cases.
One must use one’s own brains
and be able to find one’s bearings
in each particular instance.
It is, in fact,
one of the functions of a party organization
and of party leaders worthy of the name,
to acquire,
through the prolonged, persistent,
variegated and comprehensive efforts
of all thinking
representatives of a given class,
the knowledge, experience and—
in addition to knowledge and experience—
the political flair
necessary
for the speedy and correct solution
of complex political problems.

Naïve and quite inexperienced people
imagine that the permissibility of compromise in general
is sufficient
to obliterate any distinction
between opportunism,
against which we are waging,
and must wage, an unremitting struggle,
and revolutionary Marxism, or communism.
But if such people do not yet know that in nature and in society
all distinctions
are fluid and up to a certain point conventional,
nothing can help them but lengthy training, education, enlightenment, and political and everyday experience.
In the practical questions
that arise in the politics
of any particular or specific historical moment,
it is important
to single out those
which display the principal type of intolerable and treacherous compromises,
such as embody an opportunism
that is fatal to the revolutionary class,
and to exert all efforts
to explain them and combat them.
During the 1914–18 imperialist war
between two groups of equally predatory countries,
social-chauvinism
was the principal and fundamental type of opportunism,
i.e., support of “defense of country”,
which in such a war
was really equivalent to defense of the predatory interests
of one’s “own” bourgeoisie.
After the war,
defense of the robber League of Nations,
defense of direct or indirect alliances
with the bourgeoisie of one’s own country
against the revolutionary proletariat
and the “Soviet” movement,
and defense of bourgeois democracy and bourgeois parliamentarianism
against “Soviet power”
became the principal manifestations
of those intolerable and treacherous compromises,
whose sum total constituted an opportunism
fatal to the revolutionary proletariat and its cause.
<blockquote>“...
All compromise with other parties ...
any policy of maneuvring and compromise
must be emphatically rejected,
”</blockquote>the German Lefts write in the Frankfurt pamphlet.

It is surprising
that, with such views,
these Lefts
do not emphatically condemn Bolshevism!
After all,
the German Lefts cannot but know that the entire history of Bolshevism,
both before and after the October Revolution,
is full of instances of changes of tack,
conciliatory tactics and compromises
with other parties,
including bourgeois parties!

To carry on a war
for the overthrow of the international bourgeoisie,
a war which is a hundred times more difficult,
protracted and complex
than the most stubborn of ordinary wars between states,
and to renounce in advance
any change of tack,
or any utilisation
of a conflict of interests
(even if temporary)
among one’s enemies,
or any conciliation or compromise
with possible allies
(even if they are temporary, unstable, vacillating or conditional allies)—
is that not ridiculous in the extreme?
Is it not like making a difficult ascent
of an unexplored and hitherto inaccessible mountain
and refusing in advance
ever to move in zigzags,
ever to retrace one’s steps,
or ever to abandon a course once selected,
and to try others?
And yet people so immature and inexperienced
(
if youth were the explanation,
it would not be so bad;
young people are preordained to talk such nonsense
for a certain period)
have met with support—
whether direct or indirect,
open or covert, whole or partial,
it does not matter—
from some members of the Communist Party of Holland.

After the first socialist revolution
of the proletariat,
and the overthrow of the bourgeoisie in some country,
the proletariat of that country
remains for a long time weaker than the bourgeoisie,
simply because of the latter’s extensive international links,
and also because of the spontaneous and continuous restoration and regeneration of capitalism
and the bourgeoisie
by the small commodity producers of the country
which has overthrown the bourgeoisie.
The more powerful enemy
can be vanquished only
by exerting the utmost effort,
and by the most thorough, careful, attentive, skilful and obligatory use of any, even the smallest,
rift between the enemies,
any conflict of interests
among the bourgeoisie
of the various countries
and among the various groups or types of bourgeoisie
within the various countries,
and also by taking advantage of any, even the smallest,
opportunity of winning a mass ally,
even though this ally
is temporary,
vacillating, unstable, unreliable and conditional.
Those who do not understand this
reveal a failure
to understand even the smallest grain of Marxism,
of modern scientific socialism in general.
Those who have not proved in practice,
over a fairly considerable period of time
and in fairly varied political situations,
their ability to apply this truth in practice
have not yet learned
to help the revolutionary class
in its struggle
to emancipate all toiling humanity from the exploiters.
And this applies equally to the period before and after the proletariat
has won political power.

Our theory is not a dogma,
but a guide to action,
said Marx and Engels.
The greatest blunder,
the greatest crime,
committed by such “out-and-out” Marxists
as Karl Kautsky, Otto Bauer, etc.,
is that they have not understood this
and have been unable to apply it
at crucial moments of the proletarian revolution.
“
Political activity is not like the pavement of Nevsky Prospekt”
(the well-kept, broad and level pavement
of the perfectly straight principal thoroughfare of St. Petersburg),
N. G. Chernyshevsky,
the great Russian socialist of the pre-Marxist period,
used to say.
Since Chernyshevsky’s time,
disregard or forgetfulness of this truth
has cost Russian revolutionaries countless sacrifices.
We must strive at all costs
to prevent the Left Communists
and West-European and American revolutionaries
that are devoted to the working class
from paying as dearly as the backward Russians did to learn this truth.

Prior to the downfall of tsarism,
the Russian revolutionary Social-Democrats
made repeated use of the services
of the bourgeois liberals,
i.e.,
they concluded numerous practical compromises
with the latter.
In 1901–02,
even prior to the appearance of Bolshevism,
the old editorial board of Iskra
(consisting of Plekhanov, Axelrod, Zasulich, Martov, Potresov and myself)
concluded
(not for long, it is true)
a formal political alliance
with Struve,
the political leader of bourgeois liberalism,
while at the same time
being able to wage an unremitting
and most merciless ideological and political struggle
against bourgeois liberalism
and against the slightest manifestation of its influence
in the working-class movement.
The Bolsheviks have always adhered to this policy.
Since 1905
they have systematically advocated an alliance
between the working class and the peasantry,
against the liberal bourgeoisie and tsarism,
never, however,
refusing to support the bourgeoisie
against tsarism
(for instance,
during second rounds of elections,
or during second ballots)
and never ceasing their relentless ideological and political struggle
against the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
the bourgeois-revolutionary peasant party,
exposing them as petty-bourgeois democrats
who have falsely described themselves as socialists.
During the Duma elections of 1907,
the Bolsheviks entered briefly into a formal political bloc
with the Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Between 1903 and 1912,
there were periods of several years in which we were formally united
with the Mensheviks
in a single Social-Democratic Party,
but we never stopped our ideological and political struggle
against them
as opportunists
and vehicles of bourgeois influence
on the proletariat.
During the war,
we concluded certain compromises
with the Kautskyites,
with the Left Mensheviks (Martov),
and with a section of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
(Chernov and Natanson);
we were together with them
at Zimmerwald and Kienthal,
and issued joint manifestos.
However,
we never ceased and never relaxed our ideological and political struggle
against the Kautskyites,
Martov and Chernov (when Natanson died in 1919,
a “Revolutionary-Communist” Narodnik,
he was very close to and almost in agreement with us).
At the very moment of the October Revolution,
we entered into an informal but very important
(and very successful) political bloc
with the petty-bourgeois peasantry
by adopting the Socialist-Revolutionary agrarian programme
in its entirety,
without a single alteration—
i.e.,
we effected an undeniable compromise
in order to prove to the peasants that we wanted,
not to “steam-roller” them
but to reach agreement with them.
At the same time
we proposed (and soon after effected)
a formal political bloc,
including participation in the government,
with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
who dissolved this bloc
after the conclusion of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
and then, in July 1918,
went to the length of armed rebellion,
and subsequently of an armed struggle, against us.

It is therefore understandable
why the attacks made by the German Lefts
against the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Germany
for entertaining the idea of a bloc
with the Independents
(the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany—the Kautskyites)
are absolutely inane,
in our opinion,
and clear proof that the “Lefts”
are in the wrong.
In Russia, too,
there were Right Mensheviks (participants in the Kerensky government),
who corresponded to the German Scheidemanns,
and Left Mensheviks (Martov),
corresponding to the German Kautskyites
and standing in opposition to the Right Mensheviks.
A gradual shift of the worker masses
from the Mensheviks over to the Bolsheviks
was to be clearly seen in 1917.
At the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets,
held in June 1917,
we had only 13 per cent of the votes;
the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks had a majority.
At the Second Congress of Soviets (October 25, 1917, old style)
we had 51 per cent of the votes.
Why is it that in Germany
the same and absolutely identical shift of the workers from Right to Left
did not immediately strengthen the Communists,
but first strengthened the midway Independent Party,
although the latter never had independent political ideas
or an independent policy,
but merely wavered
between the Scheidemanns and the Communists?

One of the evident reasons
was the erroneous tactics
of the German Communists,
who must fearlessly and honestly admit this error
and learn to rectify it.
The error consisted in their denial of the need to take part in the reactionary bourgeois parliaments
and in the reactionary trade unions;
the error consisted in numerous manifestations
of that “Left-wing” infantile disorder
which has now come to the surface
and will consequently be cured the more thoroughly,
the more rapidly and with greater advantage to the organism.

The German Independent Social-Democratic Party
is obviously not a homogeneous body.
Alongside the old opportunist leaders
(Kautsky, Hilferding and apparently, to a considerable extent, Crispien, Ledebour and others)—
these have revealed their inability to understand the significance of Soviet power
and the dictatorship of the proletariat,
and their inability to lead the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle—
there has emerged in this party a Left and proletarian wing,
which is growing most rapidly.
Hundreds of thousands of members of this party
(which has, I think, a membership of some three-quarters of a million)
are proletarians
who are abandoning Scheidemann
and are rapidly going over to communism.
This proletarian wing has already proposed—
at the Leipzig Congress of the Independents (1919)—
immediate and unconditional affiliation to the Third International.
To fear a “compromise” with this wing of the party
is positively ridiculous.
On the contrary,
it is the duty of Communists
to seek and find a suitable form of compromise with them,
a compromise which, on the one hand,
will facilitate and accelerate the necessary complete fusion with this wing
and, on the other,
will in no way hamper the Communists
in their ideological and political struggle
against the opportunist Right wing of the Independents.
It will probably be no easy matter
to devise a suitable form of compromise—
but only a charlatan could promise the German workers and the German Communists
an “easy” road to victory.

Capitalism
would not be capitalism
if the proletariat pur sang
were not surrounded by a large number
of exceedingly motley types
intermediate between the proletarian and the semi-proletarian (who earns his livelihood
in part by the sale of his labor-power),
between the semi-proletarian and the small peasant
(and petty artisan, handicraft worker and small master in general),
between the small peasant and the middle peasant,
and so on,
and if the proletariat itself
were not divided
into more developed and less developed strata,
if it were not divided
according to territorial origin,
trade, sometimes according to religion,
and so on.
From all this follows the necessity,
the absolute necessity,
for the Communist Party,
the vanguard of the proletariat,
its class-conscious section,
to resort to changes of tack,
to conciliation and compromises
with the various groups of proletarians,
with the various parties of the workers and small masters.
It is entirely a matter of knowing
how to apply these tactics
in order to raise—not lower—
the general level of proletarian class-consciousness,
revolutionary spirit, and ability to fight and win.
Incidentally,
it should be noted
that the Bolsheviks’ victory
over the Mensheviks
called for the application of tactics
of changes of tack,
conciliation and compromises,
not only before but also after the October Revolution of 1917,
but the changes of tack and compromises
were, of course, such as assisted,
boosted and consolidated the Bolsheviks
at the expense of the Mensheviks.
The petty-bourgeois democrats
(including the Mensheviks)
inevitably vacillate
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat,
between bourgeois democracy and the Soviet system,
between reformism and revolutionism,
between love for the workers and fear of the proletarian dictatorship,
etc.
The Communists’ proper tactics
should consist in utilising these vacillations,
not ignoring them;
utilising them
calls for concessions to elements
that are turning towards the proletariat—
whenever and in the measure that they turn towards the proletariat—
in addition to fighting those who turn towards the bourgeoisie.
As a result of the application of the correct tactics,
Menshevism began to disintegrate,
and has been disintegrating more and more in our country;
the stubbornly opportunist leaders
are being isolated,
and the best of the workers
and the best elements
among the petty-bourgeois democrats
are being brought into our camp.
This is a lengthy process,
and the hasty “decision”—“No compromises, no maneuvers”—
can only prejudice the strengthening of the revolutionary proletariat’s influence
and the enlargement of its forces.

Lastly,
one of the undoubted errors
of the German “Lefts”
lies in their downright refusal
to recognize the Treaty of Versailles.
The more “weightily” and “pompously”,
the more “emphatically”
and peremptorily
this viewpoint is formulated (by K. Horner, for instance),
the less sense it seems to make.
It is not enough,
under the present conditions
of the international proletarian revolution,
to repudiate the preposterous absurdities
of “National Bolshevism”
(Laufenberg and others),
which has gone to the length of advocating a bloc
with the German bourgeoisie
for a war against the Entente.
One must realize that it is utterly false
tactics
to refuse to admit that a Soviet Germany
(if a German Soviet republic were soon to arise)
would have to recognize the Treaty of Versailles for a time,
and to submit to it.
From this it does not follow that the Independents—
at a time when the Scheidemanns were in the government,
when the Soviet government in Hungary
had not yet been overthrown,
and when it was still possible
that a Soviet revolution in Vienna
would support Soviet Hungary—
were right,
under the circumstances,
in putting forward the demand
that the Treaty of Versailles
should be signed.
At that time
the Independents tacked and maneuverd very clumsily,
for they more or less accepted responsibility
for the Scheidemann traitors,
and more or less backslid
from advocacy of a ruthless (and most calmly conducted)
class war against the Scheidemanns,
to advocacy of a “classless” or “above-class” standpoint.

In the present situation,
however,
the German Communists
should obviously not deprive themselves
of freedom of action
by giving a positive and categorical promise
to repudiate the Treaty of Versailles
in the event of communism’s victory.
That would be absurd.
They should say:
the Scheidemanns and the Kautskyites
have committed a number of acts
of treachery
hindering (and in part quite ruining)
the chances of an alliance with Soviet Russia and Soviet Hungary.
We Communists will do all we can to facilitate and pave the way for such an alliance.
However,
we are in no way obligated to repudiate the Treaty of Versailles,
come what may, or to do so at once.
The possibility of its successful repudiation
will depend,
not only on the German,
but also on the international successes of the Soviet movement.
The Scheidemanns and the Kautskyites
have hampered this movement;
we are helping it.
That is the gist of the matter;
therein lies the fundamental difference.
And if our class enemies,
the exploiters and their Scheidemann and Kautskyite lackeys,
have missed many an opportunity
of strengthening
both the German and the international Soviet movement,
of strengthening both the German and the international Soviet revolution,
the blame lies with them.
The Soviet revolution in Germany
will strengthen the international Soviet movement,
which is the strongest bulwark
(and the only reliable, invincible and world-wide bulwark)
against the Treaty of Versailles
and against international imperialism in general.
To give absolute,
categorical and immediate precedence to liberation
from the Treaty of Versailles
and to give it precedence
over the question
of liberating other countries
oppressed by imperialism,
from the yoke of imperialism,
is philistine nationalism
(worthy of the Kautskys,
the Hilferdings,
the Otto Bauers and Co.),
not revolutionary internationalism.
The overthrow of the bourgeoisie
in any of the large European countries, including Germany,
would be such a gain
for the international revolution
that, for its sake,
one can, and if necessary should,
tolerate a more prolonged existence
of the Treaty of Versailles.
If Russia, standing alone,
could endure the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
for several months,
to the advantage of the revolution,
there is nothing impossible in a Soviet Germany,
allied with Soviet Russia,
enduring the existence of the Treaty of Versailles
for a longer period,
to the advantage of the revolution.

The imperialists of France, Britain, etc.,
are trying to provoke and ensnare the German Communists:
“
Say that you will not sign the Treaty of Versailles!” they urge.
Like babes,
the Left Communists fall into the trap laid for them,
instead of skilfully maneuvring against the crafty and, at present, stronger enemy,
and instead of telling him,
“We shall sign the Treaty of Versailles now.”
It is folly, not revolutionism,
to deprive ourselves in advance of any freedom of action,
openly to inform an enemy
who is at present better armed
than we are whether we shall fight him,
and when.
To accept battle at a time when it is obviously advantageous to the enemy, but not to us,
is criminal;
political leaders of the revolutionary class
are absolutely useless
if they are incapable of “changing tack,
or offering conciliation and compromise”
in order to take evasive action
in a patently disadvantageous battle.

“Left-wing” communism in Great Britain
There is no Communist Party in Great Britain as yet,
but there is a fresh, broad, powerful and rapidly growing communist movement among the workers,
which justifies the best hopes.
There are several political parties and organizations
(the British Socialist Party, the Socialist Labour Party, the South Wales Socialist Society, the Workers’ Socialist Federation),
which desire to form a Communist Party
and are already negotiating among themselves
to this end.
In its issue of February 21, 1920, Vol. VI, No. 48, The Workers’ Dreadnought,
weekly organ of the last of the organizations mentioned,
carried an article by the editor, Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst,
entitled “Towards a Communist Party”.
The article outlines the progress of the negotiations
between the four organizations mentioned,
for the formation of a united Communist Party,
on the basis of affiliation to the Third International,
the recognition of the Soviet system instead of parliamentarianism,
and the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
It appears that
one of the greatest obstacles
to the immediate formation of a united Communist Party
is presented by the disagreement
on the questions of participation in Parliament
and on whether the new Communist Party
should affiliate to the old,
trade-unionist,
opportunist and social-chauvinist Labour Party,
which is mostly made up of trade unions.
The Workers’ Socialist Federation and the Socialist Labour Party
are opposed to taking part in parliamentary elections and in Parliament,
and they are opposed to affiliation to the Labour Party;
in this they disagree with all or with most of the members of the British Socialist Party,
which they regard as the “Right wing of the Communist parties”
in Great Britain.
(Page 5, Sylvia Pankhurst’s article.)

Thus,
the main division is the same as in Germany,
notwithstanding the enormous difference in the forms in which the disagreements manifest themselves
(in Germany the form is far closer to the “Russian”
than it is in Great Britain),
and in a number of other things.
Let us examine the arguments of the “Lefts”.

On the question of participation in Parliament,
Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst
refers to an article in the same issue,
by Comrade Gallacher,
who writes in the name of the Scottish Workers’ Council in Glasgow.
<blockquote>“The above council,” he writes,
“is definitely anti-parliamentarian,
and has behind it the Left wing
of the various political bodies.
We represent the revolutionary movement in Scotland,
striving continually
to build up a revolutionary organization
within the industries [in various branches of production],
and a Communist Party,
based on social committees, throughout the country.
For a considerable time
we have been sparring with the official parliamentarians.
We have not considered it necessary
to declare open warfare on them,
and they are afraid to open an attack on us.

“But this state of affairs
cannot long continue.
We are winning all along the line.

“The rank and file of the I.L.P.
in Scotland
is becoming more and more disgusted
with the thought of Parliament,
and the Soviets [the Russian word transliterated into English
is used]
or Workers’ Councils
are being supported by almost every branch.
This is very serious,
of course,
for the gentlemen who look to politics for a profession,
and they are using any and every means to persuade their members
to come back into the parliamentary fold.
Revolutionary comrades must not [all italics are the author’s]
give any support to this gang.
Our fight here is going to be a difficult one.
One of the worst features of it
will be the treachery
of those
whose personal ambition
is a more impelling force
than their regard for the revolution.
Any support given to parliamentarism
is simply assisting
to put power
into the hands of our British Scheidemanns and Noskes. Henderson, Clynes and Co.
are hopelessly reactionary.
The official I.L.P.
is more and more coming under the control
of middle-class Liberals,
who ... have found their ‘spiritual home’
in the camp of Messrs. MacDonald, Snowden and Co.
The official I.L.P.
is bitterly hostile to the Third International,
the rank and file is for it.
Any support to the parliamentary opportunists
is simply playing into the hands of the former.
The B.S.P. doesn’t count at all here...
What is wanted here
is a sound revolutionary industrial organisation,
and a Communist Party
working along clear, well-defined, scientific lines.
If our comrades can assist us in building these,
we will take their help gladly;
if they cannot,
for God’s sake
let them keep out altogether,
lest they betray the revolution
by lending their support to the reactionaries,
who are so eagerly clamouring
for parliamentary ‘honours’ (?) [the query mark is the author’s] and who are so anxious to prove that they can rule as effectively as the ‘boss’ class politicians themselves.
”</blockquote>
In my opinion,
this letter to the editor
expresses excellently
the temper and point of view of the young Communists,
or of rank-and-file workers
who are only just beginning to accept communism.
This temper is highly gratifying and valuable;
we must learn to appreciate and support it
for,
in its absence,
it would be hopeless to expect the victory
of the proletarian revolution
in Great Britain,
or in any other country for that matter.
People who can give expression to this temper of the masses,
and are able to evoke such a temper
(which is very often dormant, unconscious and latent)
among the masses,
should be appreciated and given every assistance.
At the same time,
we must tell them openly
and frankly
that a state of mind
is by itself
insufficient for leadership of the masses
in a great revolutionary struggle,
and that the cause of the revolution
may well be harmed
by certain errors
that people who are most devoted to the cause of the revolution
are about to commit,
or are committing.
Comrade Gallacher’s letter
undoubtedly reveals the rudiments
of all the mistakes
that are being made by the German “Left” Communists
and were made by the Russian “Left” Bolsheviks
in 1908 and 1918.

The writer of the letter
is full of a noble and working-class hatred
for the bourgeois “class politicians”
(a hatred understood and shared, however, not only by proletarians but by all working people,
by all Kleinen Leuten
to use the German expression).
In a representative of the oppressed and exploited masses,
this hatred is truly the “beginning of all wisdom”,
the basis of any socialist and communist movement
and of its success.
The writer, however,
has apparently lost sight
of the fact that politics is a science and an art that does not fall from the skies
or come gratis,
and that, if it wants to overcome the bourgeoisie,
the proletariat
must train its own proletarian “class politicians”,
of a kind
in no way inferior to bourgeois politicians.

The writer of the letter fully realizes
that only workers’ Soviets, not parliament,
can be the instrument enabling the proletariat to achieve its aims;
those who have failed to understand this
are, of course, out-and-out reactionaries,
even if they are most highly educated people,
most experienced politicians,
most sincere socialists,
most erudite Marxists,
and most honest citizens and fathers of families.
But the writer of the letter
does not even ask—
it does not occur to him
to ask—
whether it is possible
to bring about the Soviets’ victory over parliament
without getting pro-Soviet politicians into parliament,
without disintegrating parliamentarianism from within,
without working within parliament
for the success of the Soviets
in their forthcoming task
of dispersing parliament.
Yet the writer of the letter
expresses the absolutely correct idea
that the Communist Party in Great Britain
must act on scientific principles.
Science demands,
first,
that the experience of other countries
be taken into account,
especially if these other countries,
which are also capitalist,
are undergoing,
or have recently undergone,
a very similar experience;
second,
it demands that account be taken of all the forces, groups, parties, classes and masses
operating in a given country,
and also that policy
should not be determined
only
by the desires and views,
by the degree of class-consciousness
and the militancy of one group or party alone.

It is true
that the Hendersons, the Clyneses,
the MacDonalds and the Snowdens
are hopelessly reactionary.
It is equally true
that they want to assume power
(though they would prefer a coalition with the bourgeoisie),
that they want to “rule”
along the old bourgeois lines,
and that when they are in power
they will certainly behave
like the Scheidemanns and Noskes.
All that is true.
But it does not at all
follow that to support them
means treachery to the revolution;
what does follow
is that, in the interests of the revolution,
working-class revolutionaries
should give these gentlemen a certain amount of parliamentary support.
To explain this idea,
I shall take two contemporary British political documents:
(1) the speech delivered by Prime Minister Lloyd George on March 18, 1920
(as reported in The Manchester Guardian of March 19, 1920),
and (2) the arguments of a “Left” Communist, Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst,
in the article mentioned above.

In his speech Lloyd George entered into a polemic
with Asquith
(who had been especially invited to this meeting
but declined to attend)
and with those Liberals who want,
not a coalition with the Conservatives,
but closer relations with the Labour Party.
(In the above-quoted letter, Comrade Gallacher also points to the fact that Liberals are joining the Independent Labour Party.
)
Lloyd George argued that a coalition—
and a close coalition at that—
between the Liberals and the Conservatives was essential,
otherwise there might be a victory for the Labour Party,
which Lloyd George prefers to call “Socialist”
and which is working for the “common ownership”
of the means of production.
“It is ...
known as communism in France,
”
the leader of the British bourgeoisie said,
putting it popularly for his audience,
Liberal M.P.s who probably never knew it before.
In Germany
it was called socialism,
and in Russia
it is called Bolshevism,
he went on to say.
To Liberals this is unacceptable on principle,
Lloyd George explained,
because they stand in principle for private property.
“Civilisation is in jeopardy,” the speaker declared,
and consequently Liberals and Conservatives must unite...<blockquote>“... If you go to the agricultural areas,” said Lloyd George, “I agree you have the old party divisions as strong as ever.
They are removed from the danger.
It does not walk their lanes.
But when they see it they will be as strong as some of these industrial constituencies are now.
Four-fifths of this country is industrial and commercial;
hardly one-fifth is agricultural.
It is one of the things I have constantly in my mind
when I think of the dangers of the future here.
In France
the population is agricultural,
and you have a solid body of opinion
which does not move very rapidly,
and which is not very easily excited
by revolutionary movements.
That is not the case here.
This country is more top-heavy than any country in the world,
and if it begins to rock,
the crash here, for that reason,
will be greater than in any land.
”</blockquote>From this the reader will see that Mr. Lloyd George is not only a very intelligent man,
but one who has also learned a great deal
from the Marxists.
We too have something to learn from Lloyd George.

Of definite interest
is the following episode,
which occurred in the course of the discussion
after Lloyd George’s speech:
<blockquote>“Mr. Wallace, M.P.:
I should like to ask what the Prime Minister considers the effect
might be in the industrial constituencies
upon the industrial workers,
so many of whom are Liberals at the present time
and from whom we get so much support.
Would not a possible result
be to cause an immediate overwhelming accession of strength
to the Labour Party
from men who at present
are our cordial supporters?

“The Prime Minister:
I take a totally different view.
The fact that Liberals are fighting among themselves
undoubtedly drives a very considerable number of Liberals
in despair to the Labour Party,
where you get a considerable body of Liberals, very able men,
whose business it is to discredit the Government.
The result is undoubtedly to bring a good accession
of public sentiment
to the Labour Party.
It does not go to the Liberals
who are outside,
it goes to the Labour Party,
the by-elections show that.
”</blockquote>
It may be said, in passing,
that this argument shows in particular
how muddled even the most intelligent members of the bourgeoisie
have become
and how they cannot help committing irreparable blunders.
That, in fact,
is what will bring about the downfall of the bourgeoisie.
Our people, however,
may commit blunders
(provided, of course,
that they are not too serious
and are rectified in time)
and yet in the long run,
will prove the victors.

The second political document
is the following argument
advanced by Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst,
a “Left” Communist:
<blockquote>“... Comrade Inkpin [the General Secretary of the British Socialist Party]
refers to the Labour Party
as ‘the main body of the working-class movement’.
Another comrade of the British Socialist Party,
at the Third International, just held,
put the British Socialist Party position more strongly.
He said:
‘We regard the Labour Party
as the organized working class.’

“
We do not take this view of the Labour Party.
The Labour Party is very large numerically
though its membership
is to a great extent
quiescent and apathetic,
consisting of men and women
who have joined the trade unions
because their workmates are trade unionists,
and to share the friendly benefits.

“But we recognize that the great size of the Labour Party
is also due to the fact that it is the creation of a school of thought beyond
which the majority of the British working class
has not yet emerged,
though great changes are at work in the mind of the people
which will presently alter this state of affairs...

“
The British Labour Party,
like the social-patriotic organizations
of other countries,
will, in the natural development of society,
inevitably come into power.
It is for the Communists
to build up the forces
that will overthrow the social patriots,
and in this country we must not delay or falter in that work.

“
We must not dissipate our energy
in adding to the strength of the Labour Party;
its rise to power is inevitable.
We must concentrate on making a communist movement
that will vanquish it.
The Labour Party will soon be forming a government,
the revolutionary opposition must make ready to attack it...
”</blockquote>Thus the liberal bourgeoisie
are abandoning the historical system of “two parties” (of exploiters),
which has been hallowed by centuries of experience
and has been extremely advantageous to the exploiters,
and consider it necessary for these two parties
to join forces against the Labour Party.
A number of Liberals
are deserting to the Labour Party like rats from a sinking ship.
The Left Communists believe that the transfer of power
to the Labour Party
is inevitable
and admit that it now has the backing of most workers.
From this they draw the strange conclusion
which Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst formulates as follows:
    <blockquote>“The Communist Party must not compromise...
The Communist Party must keep its doctrine pure,
and its independence of reformism inviolate,
its mission is to lead the way,
without stopping or turning,
by the direct road to the communist revolution.
”</blockquote>
On the contrary,
the fact that most British workers still follow the lead of the British Kerenskys or Scheidemanns
and have not yet had experience of a government composed of these people—
an experience which was necessary in Russia and Germany
so as to secure the mass transition of the workers to communism—
undoubtedly indicates that the British Communists
should participate in parliamentary action,
that they should, from within parliament,
help the masses of the workers
see the results of a Henderson and Snowden government in practice,
and that they should help the Hendersons and Snowdens
defeat the united forces of Lloyd George and Churchill.
To act otherwise
would mean hampering the cause of the revolution,
since revolution is impossible
without a change
in the views of the majority of the working class,
a change brought about by the political experience of the masses,
never by propaganda alone.
“
To lead the way without compromises, without turning”—
this slogan is obviously wrong
if it comes from a patently impotent minority
of the workers
who know (or at all events should know)
that given a Henderson and Snowden victory
over Lloyd George and Churchill,
the majority will soon become disappointed in their leaders
and will begin to support communism
(or at all events will adopt an attitude of neutrality,
and, in the main, of sympathetic neutrality, towards the Communists).
It is as though 10,000 soldiers were to hurl themselves into battle
against an enemy force of 50,000,
when it would be proper to “halt”,
“take evasive action”,
or even effect a “compromise”
so as to gain time
until the arrival of the 100,000 reinforcements
that are on their way
but cannot go into action immediately.
That is intellectualist childishness,
not the serious tactics of a revolutionary class.

The fundamental law of revolution,
which has been confirmed by all revolutions
and especially by all three Russian revolutions in the twentieth century,
is as follows:
for a revolution to take place
it is not enough
for the exploited and oppressed masses
to realize the impossibility of living in the old way,
and demand changes;
for a revolution to take place
it is essential
that the exploiters
should not be able to live and rule in the old way.
It is only when the “lower classes”
do not want to live in the old way
and the “upper classes”
cannot carry on in the old way that the revolution can triumph.
This truth can be expressed in other words:
revolution is impossible
without a nation-wide crisis
(affecting both the exploited and the exploiters).
It follows that,
for a revolution to take place,
it is essential,
first,
that a majority of the workers
(or at least a majority of the class-conscious, thinking, and politically active workers)
should fully realize that revolution is necessary,
and that they should be prepared to die for it;
second,
that the ruling classes
should be going through a governmental crisis,
which draws even the most backward masses into politics
(symptomatic of any genuine revolution
is a rapid, tenfold and even hundredfold increase
in the size of the working and oppressed masses
—
hitherto apathetic—
who are capable of waging the political struggle),
weakens the government,
and makes it possible for the revolutionaries
to rapidly overthrow it.

Incidentally,
as can also be seen from Lloyd George’s speech,
both conditions for a successful proletarian revolution
are clearly maturing in Great Britain.
The errors of the Left Communists
are particularly dangerous at present,
because certain revolutionaries
are not displaying a sufficiently thoughtful,
sufficiently attentive,
sufficiently intelligent
and sufficiently shrewd attitude
toward each of these conditions.
If we are the party of the revolutionary class,
and not merely a revolutionary group,
and if we want the masses
to follow us
(and unless we achieve that,
we stand the risk of remaining mere windbags),
we must,
first, help Henderson or Snowden to beat Lloyd George and Churchill
(or, rather, compel the former to beat the latter,
because the former are afraid of their victory!);
second, we must help the majority of the working class
to be convinced
by their own experience
that we are right,
i.e.,
that the Hendersons and Snowdens
are absolutely good for nothing,
that they are petty-bourgeois and treacherous by nature,
and that their bankruptcy is inevitable;
third, we must bring nearer the moment when,
on the basis of the disappointment of most of the workers in the Hendersons,
it will be possible,
with serious chances of success,
to overthrow the government of the Hendersons at once;
because if the most astute and solid Lloyd George,
that big, not petty, bourgeois,
is displaying consternation
and is more and more weakening himself (and the bourgeoisie as a whole)
by his “friction” with Churchill today
and with Asquith tomorrow,
how much greater will be the consternation of a Henderson government!

I will put it more concretely.
In my opinion,
the British Communists should unite their four parties and groups
(all very weak,
and some of them very, very weak)
into a single Communist Party
on the basis of the principles of the Third International
and of obligatory participation in parliament.
The Communist Party should propose the following “compromise” election agreement
to the Hendersons and Snowdens:
let us jointly fight against the alliance
between Lloyd George and the Conservatives;
let us share parliamentary seats
in proportion to the number of workers’ votes
polled for the Labour Party
and for the Communist Party
(not in elections, but in a special ballot),
and let us retain complete freedom of agitation,
propaganda and political activity.
Of course, without this latter condition,
we cannot agree to a bloc,
for that would be treachery;
the British Communists must demand and get complete freedom
to expose the Hendersons and the Snowdens in the same way as (for fifteen years—1903–17)
the Russian Bolsheviks demanded and got it in respect of the Russian Hendersons and Snowdens,
i.e., the Mensheviks.

If the Hendersons and the Snowdens accept a bloc on these terms,
we shall be the gainers,
because the number of parliamentary seats
is of no importance to us;
we are not out for seats.
We shall yield on this point
(whilst the Hendersons and especially their new friends—
or new masters—
the Liberals who have joined the Independent Labour Party
are most eager to get seats).
We shall be the gainers,
because we shall carry our agitation among the masses
at a time
when Lloyd George himself
has “incensed” them,
and we shall not only be helping the Labour Party
to establish its government sooner,
but shall also be helping the masses
sooner
to understand the communist propaganda
that we shall carry on against the Hendersons,
without any reticence or omission.

If the Hendersons and the Snowdens
reject a bloc with us on these terms,
we shall gain still more,
for we shall at once
have shown the masses
(note that, even in the purely Menshevik
and completely opportunist Independent Labour Party,
the rank and file are in favour of Soviets)
that the Hendersons prefer their close relations
with the capitalists
to the unity of all the workers.
We shall immediately gain in the eyes of the masses,
who, particularly after the brilliant,
highly correct and highly useful (to communism)
explanations given by Lloyd George,
will be sympathetic to the idea of uniting all the workers
against the Lloyd George-Conservative alliance.
We shall gain immediately,
because we shall have demonstrated to the masses
that the Hendersons and the Snowdens
are afraid to beat Lloyd George,
afraid to assume power alone,
and are striving
to secure the secret support of Lloyd George,
who is openly extending a hand to the Conservatives,
against the Labour Party.
It should be noted that in Russia,
after the revolution of February 27, 1917
(old style),
the Bolsheviks’ propaganda
against the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
(i.e., the Russian Hendersons and Snowdens)
derived benefit precisely from a circumstance of this kind.
We said to the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries:
assume full power without the bourgeoisie,
because you have a majority in the Soviets
(at the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets, in June 1917,
the Bolsheviks had only 13 per cent of the votes).
But the Russian Hendersons and Snowdens were afraid to assume power without the bourgeoisie,
and when the bourgeoisie held up the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
knowing full well that the elections
would give a majority to the Socialist-Revolutionaries
and the Mensheviks
(who formed a close political bloc
and in fact represented only petty-bourgeois democracy),
the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks
were unable energetically and consistently to oppose these delays.

If the Hendersons and the Snowdens
reject a bloc with the Communists,
the latter will immediately gain
by winning the sympathy of the masses
and discrediting the Hendersons and Snowdens;
if, as a result,
we do lose a few parliamentary seats,
it is a matter of no significance to us.
We would put up our candidates
in a very few but absolutely safe constituencies,
namely,
constituencies where our candidatures
would not give any seats to the Liberals
at the expense of the Labour candidates.
We would take part in the election campaign,
distribute leaflets agitating for communism,
and, in all constituencies where we have no candidates,
we would urge the electors to vote for the Labour candidate
and against the bourgeois candidate.
Comrades Sylvia Pankhurst and Gallacher
are mistaken in thinking that this is a betrayal of communism,
or a renunciation of the struggle
against the social-traitors.
On the contrary,
the cause of communist revolution
would undoubtedly gain thereby.

At present,
British Communists very often find it hard even to approach the masses,
and even to get a hearing from them.
If I come out as a Communist
and call upon them to vote for Henderson and against Lloyd George,
they will certainly give me a hearing.
And I shall be able to explain in a popular manner,
not only why the Soviets are better than a parliament
and why the dictatorship of the proletariat
is better than the dictatorship of Churchill
(disguised with the signboard of bourgeois “democracy”),
but also that, with my vote,
I want to support Henderson
in the same way as the rope supports a hanged man—
that the impending establishment of a government of the Hendersons
will prove that I am right,
will bring the masses over to my side,
and will hasten the political death of the Hendersons and the Snowdens
just as was the case with their kindred spirits in Russia and Germany.

If the objection is raised
that these tactics
are too “subtle”
or too complex for the masses to understand,
that these tactics will split and scatter our forces,
will prevent us
from concentrating them on Soviet revolution, etc.,
I will reply to the “Left” objectors:
don’t ascribe your doctrinairism to the masses!
The masses in Russia
are no doubt no better educated than the masses in Britain;
if anything, they are less so.
Yet the masses understood the Bolsheviks,
and the fact that, in September 1917,
on the eve of the Soviet revolution,
the Bolsheviks put up their candidates
for a bourgeois parliament (the Constituent Assembly)
and on the day after the Soviet revolution,
in November 1917,
took part in the elections to this Constituent Assembly,
which they got rid of on January 5, 1918—
this did not hamper the Bolsheviks,
but, on the contrary, helped them.

I cannot deal here with the second point of disagreement
among the British Communists—
the question of affiliation or non-affiliation to the Labour Party.
I have too little material at my disposal
on this question,
which is highly complex
because of the unique character
of the British Labour Party,
whose very structure is so unlike that of the political parties usual in the European continent.
It is beyond doubt,
however,
first, that in this question, too,
those who try to deduce the tactics
of the revolutionary proletariat from principles
such as:
“
The Communist Party
must keep its doctrine pure,
and its independence of reformism inviolate;
its mission is to lead the way,
without stopping or turning,
by the direct road to the communist revolution”—
will inevitably fall into error.
Such principles are merely a repetition of the mistake
made by the French Blanquist Communards,
who, in 1874, “repudiated”
all compromises
and all intermediate stages.
Second,
it is beyond doubt
that, in this question too,
as always,
the task consists in learning
to apply the general and basic principles of communism
to the specific relations
between classes and parties,
to the specific features
in the objective development towards communism,
which are different in each country
and which we must be able to discover, study, and predict.

This, however,
should be discussed,
not in connection with British communism alone,
but in connection with the general conclusions
concerning the development of communism
in all capitalist countries.
We shall now proceed to deal with this subject.

Several conclusions The Russian bourgeois revolution of 1905
revealed a highly original turn in world history:
in one of the most backward capitalist countries,
the strike movement attained a scope and power unprecedented anywhere in the world.
In the first month of 1905 alone,
the number of strikers was ten times the annual average
for the previous decade (1895–1904);
from January to October 1905,
strikes grew all the time and reached enormous proportions.
Under the influence of a number of unique historical conditions,
backward Russia was the first to show the world,
not only the growth,
by leaps and bounds,
of the independent activity of the oppressed masses
in time of revolution
(this had occurred in all great revolutions),
but also that the significance of the proletariat
is infinitely greater than its proportion in the total population;
it showed a combination of the economic strike and the political strike,
with the latter developing into an armed uprising,
and the birth of the Soviets,
a new form of mass struggle
and mass organization
of the classes oppressed by capitalism.

The revolutions of February and October 1917
led to the all-round development of the Soviets
on a nation-wide scale
and to their victory in the proletarian socialist revolution.
In less than two years,
the international character of the Soviets,
the spread of this form of struggle and organization
to the world working-class movement
and the historical mission of the Soviets
as the grave-digger,
heir and successor of bourgeois parliamentarianism
and of bourgeois democracy in general,
all became clear.

But that is not all.
The history of the working-class movement
now shows that, in all countries,
it is about to go through
(and is already going through)
a struggle
waged by communism—
emergent,
gaining strength and advancing towards victory—
against, primarily, Menshevism,
i.e., opportunism
and social-chauvinism
(the home brand in each particular country),
and then as a complement, so to say, Left-wing communism.
The former struggle has developed in all countries,
apparently without any exception,
as a duel
between the Second International (already virtually dead)
and the Third International.
The latter struggle is to be seen in Germany, Great Britain, Italy,
America (at any rate,
a certain section of the Industrial Workers of the World
and of the anarcho-syndicalist trends
uphold the errors of Left-wing communism
alongside of an almost universal
and almost unreserved acceptance of the Soviet system),
and in France
(the attitude of a section of the former syndicalists
towards the political party and parliamentarianism,
also alongside of the acceptance of the Soviet system);
in other words,
the struggle is undoubtedly being waged,
not only on an international,
but even on a worldwide scale.

But while the working-class movement
is everywhere going through
what is actually the same kind of preparatory school
for victory over the bourgeoisie,
it is achieving that development
in its own way in each country.
The big and advanced capitalist countries
are travelling this road
far more rapidly
than did Bolshevism,
to which history granted fifteen years
to prepare itself for victory,
as an organized political trend.
In the brief space of a year,
the Third International
has already scored a decisive victory;
it has defeated the yellow, social-chauvinist Second International,
which only a few months ago
was incomparably stronger than the Third International,
seemed stable and powerful,
and enjoyed every possible support—
direct and indirect,
material (Cabinet posts, passports, the press)
and ideological—
from the world bourgeoisie.

It is now essential
that Communists of every country
should quite consciously take into account
both the fundamental objectives
of the struggle
against opportunism
and “Left” doctrinairism,
and the concrete features
which this struggle assumes
and must inevitably assume in each country,
in conformity with the specific character
of its economics, politics, culture, and national composition
(Ireland, etc.),
its colonies,
religious divisions,
and so on and so forth.
Dissatisfaction with the Second International
is felt everywhere
and is spreading and growing,
both because of its opportunism
and because of its inability or incapacity
to create a really centralized and really leading centre
capable of directing the international tactics
of the revolutionary proletariat
in its struggle for a world Soviet republic.
It should be clearly realized
that such a leading centre
can never be built up
on stereotyped,
mechanically equated,
and identical tactical rules of struggle.
As long as national and state distinctions
exist among peoples and countries—
and these will continue to exist
for a very long time to come,
even after the dictatorship of the proletariat
has been established
on a world-wide scale—
the unity of the international tactics
of the communist working-class movement
in all countries demands,
not the elimination of variety
or the suppression of national distinctions
(which is a pipe dream at present),
but an application of the fundamental principles of communism
(Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat),
which will correctly modify these principles
in certain particulars,
correctly adapt and apply them
to national and national-state distinctions.
To seek out, investigate, predict, and grasp that which is nationally specific
and nationally distinctive,
in the concrete manner in which each country should tackle a single international task:
victory over opportunism
and Left doctrinairism
within the working-class movement;
the overthrow of the bourgeoisie;
the establishment of a Soviet republic
and a proletarian dictatorship—
such is the basic task
in the historical period
that all the advanced countries
(and not they alone)
are going through.
The chief thing—though, of course, far from everything—
the chief thing,
has already been achieved:
the vanguard of the working class
has been won over,
has ranged itself on the side of Soviet government
and against parliamentarianism,
on the side of the dictatorship of the proletariat and against bourgeois democracy.
All efforts and all attention
should now be concentrated on the next step,
which may seem—
and from a certain viewpoint actually is—
less fundamental,
but, on the other hand,
is actually closer to a practical accomplishment of the task.
That step is:
the search after forms of the transition
or the approach to the proletarian revolution.

The proletarian vanguard
has been won over ideologically.
That is the main thing.
Without this,
not even the first step towards victory
can be made.
But that is still quite a long way from victory.
Victory cannot be won with a vanguard alone.
To throw only the vanguard
into the decisive battle,
before the entire class,
the broad masses,
have taken up a position
either of direct support for the vanguard,
or at least of sympathetic neutrality towards it
and of precluded support for the enemy,
would be, not merely foolish but criminal.
Propaganda and agitation alone
are not enough for an entire class,
the broad masses of the working people,
those oppressed by capital,
to take up such a stand.
For that,
the masses must have their own political experience.
Such is the fundamental law of all great revolutions,
which has been confirmed with compelling force and vividness,
not only in Russia but in Germany as well.
To turn resolutely towards communism,
it was necessary,
not only for the ignorant and often illiterate masses of Russia,
but also for the literate and well-educated masses of Germany,
to realize
from their own bitter experience
the absolute impotence and spinelessness,
the absolute helplessness and servility to the bourgeoisie,
and the utter vileness of the government of the paladins of the Second International;
they had to realize
that a dictatorship of the extreme reactionaries
(Kornilov in Russia; Kapp and Co. in Germany)
is inevitably the only alternative
to a dictatorship of the proletariat.

The immediate objective
of the class-conscious vanguard
of the international working-class movement,
i.e., the Communist parties, groups and trends,
is to be able to lead the broad masses
(who are still, for the most part,
apathetic, inert, dormant and convention-ridden)
to their new position,
or, rather, to be able to lead,
not only their own party
but also these masses
in their advance
and transition to the new position.
While the first historical objective
(that of winning over the class-conscious vanguard
of the proletariat
to the side of Soviet power
and the dictatorship of the working class)
could not have been reached
without a complete ideological and political victory
over opportunism
and social-chauvinism,
the second and immediate objective,
which consists in being able to lead the masses
to a new position
ensuring the victory of the vanguard in the revolution,
cannot be reached without the liquidation of Left doctrinairism,
and without a full elimination of its errors.

As long as it was (and inasmuch as it still is)
a question of winning the proletariat’s vanguard
over to the side of communism,
priority went and still goes to propaganda work;
even propaganda circles,
with all their parochial limitations,
are useful under these conditions,
and produce good results.
But when it is a question of practical action
by the masses,
of the disposition,
if one may so put it,
of vast armies,
of the alignment of all the class forces in a given society
for the final and decisive battle,
then propagandist methods alone,
the mere repetition of the truths of “pure” communism,
are of no avail.
In these circumstances,
one must not count in thousands,
like the propagandist
belonging to a small group
that has not yet given leadership to the masses;
in these circumstances
one must count in millions and tens of millions.
In these circumstances,
we must ask ourselves,
not only whether we have convinced the vanguard of the revolutionary class,
but also whether the historically effective forces of all classes
—
positively of all the classes in a given society, without exception—
are arrayed in such a way that the decisive battle is at hand—
in such a way that:
(1) all the class forces hostile to us
have become sufficiently entangled,
are sufficiently at loggerheads with each other,
have sufficiently weakened themselves in a struggle
which is beyond their strength;
(2)
all the vacillating and unstable,
intermediate elements—
the petty bourgeoisie
and the petty-bourgeois democrats,
as distinct from the bourgeoisie—
have sufficiently exposed themselves in the eyes of the people,
have sufficiently disgraced themselves
through their practical bankruptcy,
and (3)
among the proletariat,
a mass sentiment
favouring the most determined,
bold and dedicated revolutionary action
against the bourgeoisie
has emerged
and begun to grow vigorously.
Then revolution is indeed ripe;
then, indeed,
if we have correctly gauged all the conditions
indicated
and summarised above,
and if we have chosen the right moment,
our victory is assured.

The differences between the Churchills and the Lloyd Georges—
with insignificant national distinctions,
these political types exist in all countries—
on the one hand,
and between the Hendersons and the Lloyd Georges on the other,
are quite minor and unimportant
from the standpoint of pure (i.e., abstract) communism,
i.e., communism that has not yet matured
to the stage of practical political action by the masses.
However,
from the standpoint of this practical action by the masses,
these differences are most important.
To take due account of these differences,
and to determine the moment
when the inevitable conflicts
between these “friends”,
which weaken and enfeeble
all the “friends”
taken together,
will have come to a head—
that is the concern,
the task, of a Communist who wants to be,
not merely a class-conscious
and convinced propagandist of ideas,
but a practical leader of the masses in the revolution.
It is necessary
to link the strictest devotion
to the ideas of communism
with the ability
to effect all the necessary practical compromises,
tacks, conciliatory maneuvers, zigzags, retreats and so on,
in order to speed up the achievement
and then loss of political power
by the Hendersons
(the heroes of the Second International,
if we are not to name individual representatives of petty-bourgeois democracy
who call themselves socialists);
to accelerate their inevitable bankruptcy
in practice,
which will enlighten the masses
in the spirit of our ideas,
in the direction of communism;
to accelerate the inevitable friction,
quarrels, conflicts and complete disintegration
among the Hendersons,
the Lloyd Georges and the Churchills
(the Mensheviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Constitutional-Democrats, the monarchists;
the Scheidemanns, the bourgeoisie and the Kappists, etc.);
to select the proper moment
when the discord among these “pillars of sacrosanct private property”
is at its height,
so that, through a decisive offensive,
the proletariat will defeat them all and capture political power.

History as a whole,
and the history of revolutions in particular,
is always richer in content,
more varied,
more multiform,
more lively and ingenious
than is imagined
by even the best parties,
the most class-conscious vanguards
of the most advanced classes.
This can readily be understood,
because even the finest of vanguards
express the class-consciousness, will, passion and imagination of tens of thousands,
whereas at moments of great upsurge
and the exertion of all human capacities,
revolutions are made by the class-consciousness,
will, passion and imagination of tens of millions,
spurred on by a most acute struggle of classes.
Two very important practical conclusions
follow from this:
first,
that in order to accomplish its task
the revolutionary class
must be able to master all forms or aspects of social activity without exception
(completing after the capture of political power—
sometimes at great risk
and with very great danger—
what it did not complete
before the capture of power);
second,
that the revolutionary class
must be prepared for the most rapid and brusque replacement of one form by another.

One will readily agree that any army
which does not train to use all the weapons,
all the means and methods of warfare
that the enemy possesses, or may possess,
is behaving
in an unwise or even criminal manner.
This applies to politics
even more than it does to the art of war.
In politics
it is even harder to know in advance
which methods of struggle
will be applicable
and to our advantage
in certain future conditions.
Unless we learn to apply all the methods of struggle,
we may suffer grave and sometimes even decisive defeat,
if changes beyond our control
in the position of the other classes
bring to the forefront
a form of activity in which we are especially weak.
If, however,
we learn to use all the methods of struggle,
victory will be certain,
because we represent the interests
of the really foremost and really revolutionary class,
even if circumstances do not permit us
to make use of weapons
that are most dangerous to the enemy,
weapons that deal the swiftest mortal blows.
Inexperienced revolutionaries often think that legal methods of struggle
are opportunist
because, in this field,
the bourgeoisie
has most frequently deceived
and duped the workers
(particularly in “peaceful” and non-revolutionary times),
while illegal methods of struggle are revolutionary.
That, however, is wrong.
The truth is that
those parties and leaders
are opportunists
and traitors
to the working class
that are unable or unwilling
(do not say, “I can’t”;
say, “I shan’t”)
to use illegal methods of struggle
in conditions
such as those which prevailed,
for example,
during the imperialist war of 1914–18,
when the bourgeoisie
of the freest democratic countries
most brazenly and brutally deceived the workers,
and smothered the truth
about the predatory character of the war.
But revolutionaries who are incapable of combining illegal forms of struggle
with every form of legal struggle
are poor revolutionaries indeed.
It is not difficult to be a revolutionary
when revolution has already broken out
and is in spate,
when all people are joining the revolution
just because they are carried away,
because it is the vogue,
and sometimes even from careerist motives.
After its victory,
the proletariat has to make most strenuous efforts,
even the most painful,
so as to “liberate” itself
from such pseudo-revolutionaries.
It is far more difficult—
and far more precious—
to be a revolutionary
when the conditions for direct, open, really mass and really revolutionary struggle
do not yet exist,
to be able to champion the interests of the revolution
(by propaganda, agitation and organization)
in non-revolutionary bodies,
and quite often in downright reactionary bodies,
in a non-revolutionary situation,
among the masses
who are incapable of immediately appreciating the need for revolutionary methods of action.
To be able to seek,
find and correctly determine the specific path
or the particular turn of events
that will lead the masses
to the real,
decisive and final revolutionary struggle—
such is the main objective of communism
in Western Europe
and in America today.

Britain is an example.
We cannot tell—
no one can tell in advance—
how soon a real proletarian revolution
will flare up there,
and what immediate cause will most serve to rouse, kindle, and impel into the struggle
the very wide masses,
who are still dormant.
Hence,
it is our duty to carry on all our preparatory work
in such a way as to be “well shod on all four feet”
(as the late Plekhanov, when he was a Marxist and revolutionary,
was fond of saying).
It is possible
that the breach will be forced,
the ice broken,
by a parliamentary crisis,
or by a crisis
arising from colonial and imperialist contradictions,
which are hopelessly entangled
and are becoming increasingly painful and acute,
or perhaps by some third cause, etc.
We are not discussing
the kind of struggle
that will determine the fate of the proletarian revolution
in Great Britain
(no Communist has any doubt on that score;
for all of us this is a foregone conclusion):
what we are discussing
is the immediate cause
that will bring into motion
the now dormant proletarian masses,
and lead them right up to revolution.
Let us not forget that in the French bourgeois republic,
for example,
in a situation
which, from both the international and the national viewpoints,
was a hundred times less revolutionary
than it is today,
such an “unexpected”
and “petty” cause
as one of the many thousands of fraudulent machinations
of the reactionary military caste
(the Dreyfus case)
was enough to bring the people to the brink of civil war!

In Great Britain
the Communists should constantly, unremittingly and unswervingly utilise parliamentary elections
and all the vicissitudes
of the Irish, colonial and world-imperialist policy
of the British Government,
and all other fields,
spheres and aspects of public life,
and work in all of them
in a new way,
in a communist way,
in the spirit of the Third,
not the Second, International.
I have neither the time nor the space
here to describe the “Russian” “Bolshevik”
methods of participation in parliamentary elections
and in the parliamentary struggle;
I can, however, assure foreign Communists
that they were quite unlike the usual West-European parliamentary campaigns.
From this the conclusion is often drawn:
“
Well, that was in Russia,
in our country parliamentarianism is different.”
This is a false conclusion.
Communists,
adherents of the Third International in all countries,
exist for the purpose of changing—
all along the line,
in all spheres of life—
the old socialist,
trade unionist, syndicalist,
and parliamentary type of work
into a new type of work, the communist.
In Russia, too,
there was always an abundance of opportunism,
purely bourgeois sharp practices
and capitalist rigging in the elections.
In Western Europe and in America,
the Communist must learn to create a new, uncustomary, non-opportunist,
and non-careerist parliamentarianism;
the Communist parties must issue their slogans;
true proletarians,
with the help of the unorganized and downtrodden poor,
should distribute leaflets,
canvass workers’ houses and cottages
of the rural proletarians and peasants
in the remote villages
(fortunately there are many times fewer remote villages in Europe than in Russia,
and in Britain
the number is very small);
they should go into the public houses,
penetrate into unions,
societies and chance gatherings
of the common people,
and speak to the people,
not in learned (or very parliamentary) language,
they should not at all strive to “get seats” in parliament,
but should everywhere try to get people to think,
and draw the masses into the struggle,
to take the bourgeoisie at its word and utilise the machinery it has set up,
the elections it has appointed,
and the appeals it has made to the people;
they should try to explain to the people
what Bolshevism is,
in a way that was never possible (under bourgeois rule)
outside of election times
(exclusive, of course, of times of big strikes,
when in Russia
a similar apparatus
for widespread popular agitation
worked even more intensively).
It is very difficult to do this
in Western Europe
and extremely difficult in America,
but it can and must be done,
for the objectives of communism
cannot be achieved without effort.
We must work to accomplish practical tasks,
ever more varied
and ever more closely connected
with all branches of social life,
winning branch after branch,
and sphere after sphere from the bourgeoisie.

In Great Britain,
further,
the work of propaganda,
agitation and organization
among the armed forces
and among the oppressed
and underprivileged nationalities
in their “own” state (Ireland, the colonies)
must also be tackled
in a new fashion
(one that is not socialist, but communist; not reformist, but revolutionary).
That is because,
in the era of imperialism
in general and especially today
after a war
that was a sore trial to the peoples
and has quickly opened their eyes
to the truth
(i.e., the fact that tens of millions were killed
and maimed for the sole purpose
of deciding
whether the British or the German robbers
should plunder the largest number of countries),
all these spheres of social life
are heavily charged
with inflammable material
and are creating numerous causes of conflicts,
crises and an intensification
of the class struggle.
We do not and cannot know which spark—
of the innumerable sparks
that are flying about in all countries
as a result of the world economic and political crisis—
will kindle the conflagration,
in the sense of raising up the masses;
we must, therefore, with our new and communist principles,
set to work to stir up all and sundry,
even the oldest,
mustiest and seemingly hopeless spheres,
for otherwise we shall not be able to cope with our tasks,
shall not be comprehensively prepared,
shall not be in possession of all the weapons
and shall not prepare ourselves either
to gain victory
over the bourgeoisie
(which arranged all aspects of social life—
and has now disarranged them—
in its bourgeois fashion),
or to bring about the impending communist reorganization
of every sphere of life,
following that victory.

Since the proletarian revolution in Russia
and its victories on an international scale,
expected neither by the bourgeoisie nor the philistines,
the entire world
has become different,
and the bourgeoisie everywhere
has become different too.
It is terrified of “Bolshevism”,
exasperated by it almost to the point of frenzy,
and for that very reason it is,
on the one hand,
precipitating the progress of events and, on the other,
concentrating on the forcible suppression of Bolshevism,
thereby weakening its own position
in a number of other fields.
In their tactics
the Communists in all the advanced countries
must take both these circumstances
into account.

When the Russian Cadets and Kerensky began furiously to hound the Bolsheviks—
especially since April 1917,
and more particularly in June and July 1917—
they overdid things.
Millions of copies of bourgeois papers,
clamouring in every key against the Bolsheviks,
helped the masses
to make an appraisal of Bolshevism;
apart from the newspapers,
all public life
was full of discussions
about Bolshevism,
as a result of the bourgeoisie’s “zeal”.
Today the millionaires of all countries
are behaving
on an international scale
in a way that deserves our heartiest thanks.
They are hounding Bolshevism
with the same zeal as Kerensky and Co. did;
they, too,
are overdoing things and helping us
just as Kerensky did.
When the French bourgeoisie
makes Bolshevism the central issue in the elections,
and accuses the comparatively moderate or vacillating socialists
of being Bolsheviks;
when the American bourgeoisie,
which has completely lost its head,
seizes thousands and thousands of people
on suspicion of Bolshevism,
creates an atmosphere of panic,
and broadcasts stories of Bolshevik plots;
when, despite all its wisdom and experience,
the British bourgeoisie—
the most “solid” in the world—
makes incredible blunders,
founds richly endowed “anti-Bolshevik societies”,
creates a special literature on Bolshevism,
and recruits an extra number of scientists,
agitators and clergymen
to combat it,
we must salute and thank the capitalists.
They are working for us.
They are helping us
to get the masses
interested in the essence and significance of Bolshevism,
and they cannot do otherwise,
for they have already failed
to ignore Bolshevism
and stifle it.

But at the same time,
the bourgeoisie sees practically only one aspect of Bolshevism—insurrection, violence, and terror;
it therefore strives to prepare itself for resistance and opposition primarily in this field.
It is possible that, in certain instances, in certain countries,
and for certain brief periods,
it will succeed in this.
We must reckon with such an eventuality,
and we have absolutely nothing to fear if it does succeed.
Communism is emerging in positively every sphere of public life;
its beginnings
are to be seen literally on all sides.
The “contagion”
(to use the favourite metaphor of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois police,
the one mostly to their liking)
has very thoroughly penetrated the organism
and has completely permeated it.
If special efforts are made to block one of the channels,
the “contagion”
will find another one, sometimes very unexpectedly.
Life will assert itself.
Let the bourgeoisie rave,
work itself into a frenzy,
go to extremes,
commit follies,
take vengeance on the Bolsheviks in advance,
and endeavour to kill off
(as in India, Hungary, Germany, etc.)
more hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands of yesterday’s and tomorrow’s Bolsheviks.
In acting thus,
the bourgeoisie
is acting as all historically doomed classes
have done.
Communists should know that,
in any case,
the future belongs to them;
therefore,
we can (and must)
combine the most intense passion
in the great revolutionary struggle,
with the coolest and most sober appraisal
of the frenzied ravings of the bourgeoisie.
The Russian revolution was cruelly defeated in 1905;
the Russian Bolsheviks were defeated in July 1917;
over 15,000 German Communists were killed
as a result of the wily provocation and cunning maneuvers
of Scheidemann and Noske,
who were working hand in glove with the bourgeoisie
and the monarchist generals;
White terror is raging in Finland and Hungary.
But in all cases in all countries,
communism is becoming steeled and is growing;
its roots are so deep
that persecution
does not weaken
or debilitate it
but only strengthens it.
Only one thing is lacking
to enable us
to march forward more confidently and firmly to victory,
namely,
the universal and thorough awareness
of all Communists
in all countries
of the necessity
to display the utmost flexibility
in their tactics.
The communist movement,
which is developing magnificently,
now lacks, especially in the advanced countries,
this awareness and the ability
to apply it in practice.

That which happened to such leaders of the Second International,
such highly erudite Marxists
devoted to socialism
as Kautsky, Otto Bauer and others,
could (and should)
provide a useful lesson.
They fully appreciated the need for flexible tactics;
they themselves learned Marxist dialectic
and taught it to others
(and much of what they have done in this field
will always remain a valuable contribution to socialist literature);
however,
in the application of this dialectic they committed such an error,
or proved to be so undialectical in practice,
so incapable of taking into account the rapid change of forms
and the rapid acquisition
of new content
by the old forms,
that their fate is not much more enviable
than that of Hyndman, Guesde and Plekhanov.
The principal reason for their bankruptcy
was
that they were hypnotized
by a definite form of growth
of the working-class movement and socialism,
forgot all about the one-sidedness of that form,
were afraid to see the break-up
which objective conditions made inevitable,
and continued to repeat simple and, at first glance,
incontestable axioms
that had been learned by rote, like: “three is more than two”.
But politics is more like algebra
than like arithmetic,
and still more like higher than elementary mathematics.
In reality,
all the old forms of the socialist movement
have acquired a new content,
and, consequently, a new symbol,
the “minus” sign,
has appeared in front of all the figures;
our wiseacres, however,
have stubbornly continued (and still continue)
to persuade themselves and others
that “minus three” is more than “minus two”.

We must see to it that Communists do not make a similar mistake,
only in the opposite sense,
or rather, we must see to it that a similar mistake,
only made in the opposite sense by the “Left” Communists,
is corrected as soon as possible
and eliminated as rapidly and painlessly as possible.
It is not only Right doctrinairism that is erroneous;
Left doctrinairism is erroneous too.
Of course,
the mistake of Left doctrinairism in communism
is at present a thousand times less dangerous
and less significant
than that of Right doctrinairism
(i.e., social-chauvinism and Kautskyism);
but, after all, that is only due to the fact that Left communism
is a very young trend,
is only just coming into being.
It is only for this reason
that, under certain conditions,
the disease can be easily eradicated,
and we must set to work with the utmost energy
to eradicate it.

The old forms burst asunder,
for it turned out
that their new content—
anti-proletarian and reactionary—
had attained an inordinate development.
From the standpoint of the development of international communism,
our work today
has such a durable and powerful content
(for Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat)
that it can and must manifest itself in any form,
both new and old;
it can and must regenerate,
conquer and subjugate all forms,
not only the new, but also the old—
not for the purpose of reconciling itself with the old,
but for the purpose of making all and every form—
new and old—
a weapon for the complete and irrevocable victory of communism.

The Communists
must exert every effort
to direct the working-class movement
and social development
in general
along the straightest and shortest road
to the victory of Soviet power
and the dictatorship of the proletariat on a world-wide scale.
That is an incontestable truth.
But it is enough to take one little step farther—
a step that might seem to be in the same direction—
and truth turns into error.
We have only to say,
as the German and British Left Communists do,
that we recognize only one road,
only the direct road,
and that we will not permit tacking,
conciliatory maneuvers, or compromising—
and it will be a mistake
which may cause,
and in part has already caused and is causing,
very grave prejudices to communism.
Right doctrinairism persisted in recognizing only the old forms,
and became utterly bankrupt,
for it did not notice the new content.
Left doctrinairism persists in the unconditional repudiation
of certain old forms,
failing to see that the new content
is forcing its way through all and sundry forms,
that it is our duty as Communists
to master all forms,
to learn how,
with the maximum rapidity,
to supplement one form with another,
to substitute one for another,
and to adapt our tactics
to any such change
that does not come from our class or from our efforts.

World revolution
has been so powerfully stimulated
and accelerated
by the horrors,
vileness and abominations
of the world imperialist war
and by the hopelessness of the situation created by it,
this revolution is developing in scope and depth
with such splendid rapidity,
with such a wonderful variety of changing forms,
with such an instructive practical refutation
of all doctrinairism,
that there is every reason to hope for a rapid and complete recovery
of the international communist movement
from the infantile disorder
of “Left-wing” communism.

April 27, 1920

Notes