Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov (22 April 1870 — 21 January 1924),
better known as Vladimir Lenin,
was a Russian revolutionary leader,
political and economic theorist, philosopher and statesman.
He was the main leader of the October Revolution,
which led to the establishment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the first workers' and peasants' state.

Lenin's main contribution to Marxist theory
was his theory of imperialism,
the domination of monopolies and cartels.
In many of his works,
he also contributed greatly
to the development of a Marxist praxis,
the strategy and tactics of the revolution,
the Marxist theory of state,
and the structuring of a proletarian organization
through democratic centralism.

Lenin's political and theoretical activity,
his writings of the 1890s
and the beginning of the 20th century,
his resolute struggle
against opportunism
and revisionist attempts
to distort Marxist theory,
and his struggle for the creation of a revolutionary political party
is considered the Leninist contribution to Marxism,
now commonly referred to as Marxism–Leninism.

Early life (1870–1888) left|thumb|193x193px|Photograph of Lenin's family in 1879.
The 9 year old Lenin is positioned in the bottom-right corner of the photo.
Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov was born in Simbirsk on 22 April 1870,
the fourth of eight children of Ilya Ulyanov,
a respected figure in public education
and son of former serf,
and Maria Alexandrovna,
a woman who came from a family of nobility background.
Although Lenin's father was not a revolutionary himself,
he shared progressive views
and opposed autocracies,
and both his father and mother
contributed greatly with his intellectual upbringing.
Besides his mother and father,
a big intellectual influence on Lenin
was his brother Alexander,
who first introduced him to Marxist literature.

Lenin's youth and childhood
coincided with a reactionary period in Russia,
when civilians were commonly arrested
for expressing criticism
of the czarist regime.
In May 1887,
when Lenin was 17 years old,
his brother Alexander Ulyanov
was publicly executed
for an attempt to assassinate the tsar Alexander III,
and event which had an impact
in Lenin's radicalization
towards revolutionary action.

Lenin was admitted to the Faculty of Law at Kazan University in 13 August 1886,
and a month later he joined the Samara-Simbirsk Fraternity,
a student society,
at the time prohibited by the University Statutes
and punishable by expulsion.
A year after he began his studies,
he joined student campaigns and demonstrations
demanding that student socie­ties be permitted,
that students who had been expelled
be rein­stated
and those responsible for their expulsion
be called to account.

Lenin began to practice law
in the Samara Regional Court,
and he appeared for defense in court about twenty times
during the period of 1892–93.
His legal practice, however,
was secondary only to diligently studying Marxism
to prepare himself for revolutionary work.
In 1892, Lenin organized the first Marxist circle in Samara.
The study group
focused on the works of Marx and Engels,
the works of Plekhanov and others.
an analysis of Russia's economy
based on data and statistics
on peasant farming.

In August 1893,
Lenin went to St. Petersburg,
where he attended to several Marxist circle meetings,
where the sharply criticized the liberal Narodniks,
serving as a basis for Lenin's 1894 book
What the “friends of the people”
are and how they fight the social-democrats?,
which was illegally distributed in 3 parts throughout cities of Russia,
laying down the theoretical foundation
for the program and tactics
of the Russian revolutionary social-democrats.

Establishment of a united Marxist organization and arrest (1895–1897) thumb|296x296px|Lenin in 1895
In March 1895,
Lenin attended a conference in St. Petersburg
of members of the social-democratic groups of St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev and Vilno.
The conference discussed the question of changing over
from the propaganda of Marxism
in nar­row circles
to mass political agitation,
and of publishing popular literature for the workers
and establishing close contact with them.
It was decided to send two represent­atives abroad,
and Lenin was one of them.

From May to September,
Lenin traveled abroad
to meet the social-democrats in exile,
mainly Plekhanov,
in Berlin,
Lenin first met Wilhelm Liebknecht
a German social-democrat and in Paris,
Lenin met Paul Lafargue, Marx's son-in-law and socialist militant.
In the same year,
the Marxist circles of St. Peters­burg
united into a single political organi­zation
under Lenin's leadership.
In December this organization adopted the name of League of Struggle
for the Emancipation of the Working Class.
Krupskaya was able to exchange letters with Lenin
by describing herself as Lenin's fianceé,
and through her he maintained communication with the members of the League.

Siberian exile (1897–1900)
After more than fourteen months of imprisonment
Lenin was sen­tenced to three years in exile
in the village of Shushenskoye
in Eastern Siberia
under police surveillance.
The sentence was announced to him on February 13, 1897.
In a 1897 letter to his mother and sister during his exile,
Lenin asked them
to bring him works
written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
published in French,
The poverty of philosophy,
Critique of Hegel's philosophy of right,
and a chapter of Anti-Dühring.
Krupskaya,
who was in prison since August 1896
in the same case as Lenin,
received permission to join Lenin in Shushenskoye
by describing herself as his fianceé in December 1897,
and in May 1898 she finally arrived,
marrying Lenin a month later.

During his time in exile,
Lenin developed two main works,
The tasks of the Russian social-democrats,
where he presented the practical works
of the Russian social-democrats
as spreading the teachings of scientific socialism
and fighting against czarism,
and The development of capitalism in Russia,
a thorough and profoundly researched study
on the economic development of Russia
published in 1899
under a pseudonym.
The book provided,
through extensive analysis
and ample statistical evidence,
a well-reasoned argument
in support of a revolutionary alliance
between working class and peasantry,
considering Imperial Russia's historical conditions,
and showed that a process of economic differentiation
had begun among the peasants,
a few of which were becoming kulaks,
or the rural bourgeoisie.

The first congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP)
was held in March, 1898 in Minsk,
which founded the party
and showed that the organization was growing withstanding the blows it received from the arrest of its leaders.
Although the congress and its Manifesto
were in many respects lacking, at the time,
Lenin described the foundation of the RSDLP
as "the biggest step taken by the Russian working-class movement
in its fusion with the Russian revolutionary movement.
"
With the publication of The development of capitalism in Russia
in 1899,
Lenin begun a struggle
against the anti-Marxist ideologues
known at the time as the Narodnik
and the "legal Marxists",
represented especially by Bernstein,
whose ideas Lenin described as "an attempt to narrow the theory of Marxism,
to convert the revolutionary workers' party
into a reformist party".

The idea of creating of a single, united Marxist party in Russia
occupied a central place
in Lenin's writings
at the time of his exile in Siberia.
Lenin wrote three articles for the Workers' Gazette,
which had been adopted
as the official newspaper organ of the RSDLP,
on the question of founding a Marxist party,
Our programme, Our immediate task,
An urgent question.
These articles were published only in 1925,
because the Central Committee was arrested
and the newspapers organ of the RSDLP was destroyed.
At the end of his exile,
Lenin didn't have his term prolonged,
but was prohibited
from residing in university cities or large industrial centers.
Lenin chose a place of residence
close to St. Petersburg.

Development of a proletarian party (1900–1903)
Once out of exile,
Lenin had to establish connections with the social-democratic organizations,
but on his way from Siberia to Pskov
he first stops
at the Ufa Gubernia
to see his wife Krupskaya
and his mother-in-law
to help them
get settled
for the rest of Krupskaya's exile.
There,
he also began meeting with social-democrats
who were then living in exile in the region
and presented them his plan
for setting up a revolutionary newspaper
to broaden possibilities
for the activities of the Russian Marxists.
Lenin spent most of the year 1900
traveling inside Russia and abroad
to meet with social-democrats
discussing the publication of a Russian Marxist newspaper and magazine.
During this time,
he wrote a draft of the editorial board declaration of the Iskra and Zarya,
in which he described the task of establishing an all-Russian social-democratic newspaper
as the "the first step"
on the road to open political struggle.

In the summer of 1900,
Lenin discussed with Plekhanov the publication of Iskra,
to which Plekhanov demanded a privileged position
on the editorial board
and this triggered a heated debate
with Lenin
to the point his relationship with Plekhanov became severely strained.
Plekhanov's arrogant and petty behavior
profoundly affected Lenin,
as described in his writing
How the "Spark"
was nearly extinguished,
where his disappointment with Plekhanov's irate, confused and manipulative behavior
is detailed.
At the end of the year,
in spite of the misfortunes,
Lenin had managed to establish an agreement
with Plekhanov's Emancipation of Labour group
and Lenin wrote the Declaration of the editorial board of Iskra,
presenting the tasks
of uniting the disorganized social-democrat groups
into a strong party
under the single banner of revolutionary social-democracy,
and establishing ideological unity
against opportunist trends.
The first publication of Iskra
introduced an article by Lenin
titled The urgent tasks of our movement,
where he declares the main task of the social-democrats
at the time
was the overthrow of autocracy
and spreading the ideas of scientific socialism into the masses.

Lenin spent the whole year of 1901
managing and writing articles for Iskra,
among which was Where to begin?,
where Lenin mentions that the role of the newspaper "
is not limited solely
to the dissemination of ideas,
to political education,
and to the enlistment of political allies.
A newspaper is not only a collective propagandist
and a collective agitator,
it is also a collective organizer".
In this article,
he also reinforces the need for an all-Russian newspaper
and an united revolutionary social-democratic party.
At the end of 1901,
Vladimir Ilyich had begun using "Lenin" as pseudonym,
with no particular reasoning behind the name.

During the period of 1901–1902,
the editorial board of the Iskra
was drafting a programme for the RSDLP
in preparation for the Second Congress of the party.
Sharp ideological differences between Plekhanov and Lenin arose,
and they wrote different drafts for the programme,
which was later united into a single programme
by a dedicated committee.
Most notably,
Lenin insisted on advocating the dictatorship of the proletariat
as an essential condition of the revolution in the party programme.
In 1902, Lenin published his famous work,
What is to be done?,
presenting a thorough analysis
of the international opportunist trends
in social-democratic organizations of Europe.
In this book,
he also addressed organizational questions
and issues
of the Russian social-democracy
at the time,
reinforcing the need for a united social-democratic revolutionary party.

The draft of the programme for the RSDLP was published in Iskra in June, 1902,
and in the Second Congress of the RSDLP,
held in July–August 1903,
the party adopted the programme
with minor changes.
The adopted programme was the party's programme
until after the revolution, in 1919.
The Second Congress' agenda
included a discussion of the party programme,
the party organization,
the election of the central committee
and the editorial board of the party's central newspaper organ.
In this congress,
Lenin set a resolute struggle
against the persisting opportunist trends
of the "Economists"
on the basis of ideological and organizational principles.
As a result of this congress,
Lenin's supporters received the majority of votes in the Party election
and they began to be known as Bolsheviks,
while the opportunists in minority
became known as Mensheviks.

Initial struggles
against Menshevik opportunism
inside the RSDLP (1903–1905)
After having their positions defeated at the Second Congress in 1903,
the newly-formed opportunist Menshevik faction
frequently disregarded the congress decisions,
sabotaged party work,
and began to attempt to gain control of the party's central bodies.
Having sided with the Mensheviks,
Plekhanov co-opted to the editorial board of Iskra all of its former editors,
disregarding the congress resolutions.
As a response,
Lenin resigned from Iskra's editorial board
and worked closely with the Central Committee,
in an effort to shield it from opportunist trends.
Under Menshevik control,
the editorial board of Iskra
launched a campaign against Lenin and the Bolsheviks.
Lenin briefly exposed these opportunist tactics
of the Mensheviks
and their disrupting activities
during and after the Second Congress
in an open letter
titled Why I resigned from the Iskra editorial board.

The Bolsheviks
were faced with the necessity
of thoroughly exposing the Mensheviks' anti-party activities
and the internal struggles
the party was facing against opportunism
since the Second Congress.
To this end,
Lenin published in May, 1904
the book One step forward,
two steps back,
where he carefully reviewed the minutes and resolutions of the Second Congress
and exposed the rise of an opportunist trend.
In this work,
Lenin also developed standards for a healthy party life,
namely strict observance of party rules,
common party discipline
for all party members,
consistent application of democratic centralism,
inner-party democracy,
development of independent activity of the masses of party membership
and development of criticism and self-criticism,
all under the principle of collective leadership.
In the final and concluding passage of the book,
Lenin mentions the importance of the organization of the working class:
"
In its struggle for power
the proletariat
has no other weapon but organization.
"

This struggle
cost much for Lenin's mental health,
urging him to take a rest from his work.
He and Krupskaya spent a month in the mountains hiking,
which was enough for Lenin to regain his energy.
Back from his rest,
Lenin discussed with his comrades plans
to start a publication of a Bolshevik newspaper organ
and to launch a campaign calling for a Third Congress of the RSDLP.
Since 1904,
a war had broken out
between the Russian and the Japanese empires.
Lenin wrote an agitative leaflet a week after the outbreak of war
that the Russian proletariat
had nothing to gain
from the bourgeois imperial ambitions of tsarist Russia,
and that the war
would sprout revolutionary movements
against the autocratic government.
As a result of war,
social and revolutionary unrest
began to rise in Russia,
prompting Lenin to work to prepare the Party for the approaching revolution.
The Mensheviks, however,
persisted with their disruptive activities,
having gained control of some Party organs
to pursuit their own factional interests.
Lenin resolutely called out the Bolsheviks
to break with the Mensheviks
and organize to convene a Third Congress.
The Bolsheviks held a meeting in Geneva on December 12, 1904
discussing the founding a Bolshevik periodical, Vperyod,
in preparation to the Third Congress of the RSDLP.
It was published the first time in January 4, 1905.

First Russian revolution (1905–1907) In Russia,
a series of local strikes
evolved into a general strike in 7 January, 1905,
beginning the Russian revolution of 1905.
The Third Congress was held between 25 April and 10 May, 1905,
and the Mensheviks were absent,
even though they were invited.
One of the resolutions of the Third Congress approved by the Bolsheviks
was the task of organizing the proletariat
for an armed uprising
against tsarist autocracy.
During the months of June and July,
Lenin wrote the book
Two tactics of social-democracy in the democratic revolution,
in which he detailed the theoretical considerations
behind the resolutions in the Third Congress
and heavily criticized the Menshevik political line.

Lenin returned to Russia in 21 November 1905
and began working extensively with other Bolsheviks
to prepare for an armed uprising.
Together with the newly formed worker councils (Soviets),
the Bolsheviks declared a general strike in 5 December
and began an armed struggle against tsarist troops.
However, by 16 December,
the revolutionary forces were being consistently suppressed
and a decision was passed
to end the uprising
to preserve revolutionary forces.
Lenin analyzed the experiences of the uprising
and outlined basic tactics
that should guide the Party
in case of another armed uprising.

After the 1905 revolution,
the tsarist government became more and more repressive,
to the point that Lenin was obligated to leave Russia
to avoid getting arrested
after noticing he was being followed.
He managed to travel to Finland
avoiding authorities,
and stayed there up until December 1907,
traveling back and forth
between the city of Kuokkala and St. Petersburg.

Self-exile (1907–1917) Second Revolution (1917) thumb|Lenin
proclaiming soviet power in 1917.
Behind him are Stalin,
[
[Yakov Sverdlov|Sverdlov, and Dzerzhinsky.]]
In March 1917,
Lenin called for the liberation of all colonized and oppressed nations.
In April, he published the April Theses,
which denounced the Great War
and called for another revolution
to overthrow the provisional government
and establish a soviet republic and Third International.

Soviet government (1918–1923) thumb|Painting of Lenin and Dzerzhinsky
during the [[Russian Civil War|Civil War]]
In June 1920,
Lenin met with two Japanese journalists: K. Fussa and M. Nakahira.
He asked them questions
about Japanese history and society.
He was happy when he learned that corporal punishment of children
was rare in Japan,
as the Soviet government had banned it three years earlier.

Declining health and death (1923–1924)
Lenin suffered his first stroke in May 1922 and another in December.
Following the second stroke,
his doctors tried to isolate him from politics
because they feared it could cause another attack.
Lenin's state worsened in February 1923
and he became unable to work.

Lenin's 'will' Lenin composed his last writing
in late December 1922
with a postscript from January 1923.
Trotskyists and anti-communists claim that this was Lenin's 'will',
but Trotsky himself admitted in 1925
that there had never been a will.

The document
called for increasing the number of Central Committee members from 50 to 100
in order to prevent a split in the party.
It also evaluated five party leaders:
Stalin, Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Bukharin.
Lenin criticized Trotsky
for being bureaucratic and egocentric
and said that Bukharin did not fully understand dialectics.
He accused Zinoviev and Kamenev of treason
during the October Revolution.
The postscript criticized Stalin
for being rude to Krupskaya.

Library works *(1902) What is to be done? *(1905)
Two tactics of social-democracy
in the democratic revolution *
(1908) Materialism and empiriocriticism *(1913) The three sources and three component parts of Marxism *(1916) Imperialism,
the highest stage of capitalism *(1917) The state and revolution *
(1918)
The proletarian revolution
and the renegade Kautsky *(1920) “Left-wing” communism,
an infantile disorder

References Notes <references group="lower-alpha" />